Chapter OneArrest - Conversation with Mrs. Grubach - Then Miss Bürstner
Someone must have been telling lies about Josef K., he knew he haddone nothing wrong but, one morning, he was arrested.  Every day ateight in the morning he was brought his breakfast by  Mrs. Grubach'scook - Mrs. Grubach was his landlady - but today she didn't come.  Thathad never happened before.  K. waited a little while, looked from hispillow at the old woman who lived opposite and who was watching him withan inquisitiveness quite unusual for her, and finally, both hungry anddisconcerted, rang the bell.  There was immediately a knock at the doorand a man entered.  He had never seen the man in this house before.  Hewas slim but firmly built, his clothes were black and close-fitting,with many folds and pockets, buckles and buttons and a belt, all ofwhich gave the impression of being very practical but without making itvery clear what they were actually for.  "Who are you?" asked K.,sitting half upright in his bed.  The man, however, ignored the questionas if his arrival simply had to be accepted, and merely replied, "Yourang?"  "Anna should have brought me my breakfast," said K.  He tried towork out who the man actually was, first in silence, just throughobservation and by thinking about it, but the man didn't stay still tobe looked at for very long.  Instead he went over to the door, opened itslightly, and said to someone who was clearly standing immediatelybehind it, "He wants Anna to bring him his breakfast."  There was alittle laughter in the neighbouring room, it was not clear from thesound of it whether there were several people laughing.  The strange mancould not have learned anything from it that he hadn't known already,but now he said to K., as if making his report "It is not possible.""It would be the first time that's happened," said K., as he jumped outof bed and quickly pulled on his trousers.  "I want to see who that isin the next room, and why it is that Mrs. Grubach has let me bedisturbed in this way."  It immediately occurred to him that he needn'thave said this out loud, and that he must to some extent haveacknowledged their authority by doing so, but that didn't seem importantto him at the time.  That, at least, is how the stranger took it, as hesaid, "Don't you think you'd better stay where you are?"  "I wantneither to stay here nor to be spoken to by you until you've introducedyourself."  "I meant it for your own good," said the stranger and openedthe door, this time without being asked.  The next room, which K.
entered more slowly than he had intended, looked at first glance exactlythe same as it had the previous evening.  It was Mrs. Grubach's livingroom, over-filled with furniture, tablecloths, porcelain andphotographs.  Perhaps there was a little more space in there than usualtoday, but if so it was not immediately obvious, especially as the maindifference was the presence of a man sitting by the open window with abook from which he now looked up.  "You should have stayed in your room!Didn't Franz tell you?"  "And what is it you want, then?" said K.,looking back and forth between this new acquaintance and the one namedFranz, who had remained in the doorway.  Through the open window henoticed the old woman again, who had come close to the window oppositeso that she could continue to see everything.  She was showing aninquisitiveness that really made it seem like she was going senile. "Iwant to see Mrs. Grubach ...," said K., making a movement as if tearinghimself away from the two men - even though they were standing well awayfrom him - and wanted to go.  "No," said the man at the window, whothrew his book down on a coffee table and stood up.  "You can't go awaywhen you're under arrest."  "That's how it seems," said K.  "And why amI under arrest?" he then asked.  "That's something we're not allowed totell you.  Go into your room and wait there.  Proceedings are underwayand you'll learn about everything all in good time.  It's not reallypart of my job to be friendly towards you like this, but I hope no-one,apart from Franz, will hear about it, and he's been more friendlytowards you than he should have been, under the rules, himself.  If youcarry on having as much good luck as you have been with your arrestingofficers then you can reckon on things going well with you."  K. wantedto sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the chair by the window,there was nowhere anywhere in the room where he could sit.  "You'll getthe chance to see for yourself how true all this is," said Franz andboth men then walked up to K.  They were significantly bigger than him,especially the second man, who frequently slapped him on the shoulder.
The two of them felt K.'s nightshirt, and said he would now have to wearone that was of much lower quality, but that they would keep thenightshirt along with his other underclothes and return them to him ifhis case turned out well.  "It's better for you if you give us thethings than if you leave them in the storeroom," they said.  "Thingshave a tendency to go missing in the storeroom, and after a certainamount of time they sell things off, whether the case involved has cometo an end or not.  And cases like this can last a long time, especiallythe ones that have been coming up lately.  They'd give you the moneythey got for them, but it wouldn't be very much as it's not what they'reoffered for them when they sell them that counts, it's how much they getslipped on the side, and things like that lose their value anyway whenthey get passed on from hand to hand, year after year."  K. paid hardlyany attention to what they were saying, he did not place much value onwhat he may have still possessed or on who decided what happened tothem.  It was much more important to him to get a clear understanding ofhis position, but he could not think clearly while these people werehere, the second policeman's belly - and they could only be policemen -looked friendly enough, sticking out towards him, but when K. looked upand saw his dry, boney face it did not seem to fit with the body.   Hisstrong nose twisted to one side as if ignoring K. and sharing anunderstanding with the other policeman.  What sort of people were these?What were they talking about?  What office did they belong to?  K. wasliving in a free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all lawswere decent and were upheld, who was it who dared accost him in his ownhome?  He was always inclined to take life as lightly as he could, tocross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, evenwhen everything seemed under threat.  But here that did not seem theright thing to do.  He could have taken it all as a joke, a big joke setup by his colleagues at the bank for some unknown reason, or alsoperhaps because today was his thirtieth birthday, it was all possible ofcourse, maybe all he had to do was laugh in the policemen's face in someway and they would laugh with him, maybe they were tradesmen from thecorner of the street, they looked like they might be - but he wasnonetheless determined, ever since he first caught sight of the onecalled Franz, not to lose any slight advantage he might have had overthese people.  There was a very slight risk that people would later sayhe couldn't understand a joke, but - although he wasn't normally in thehabit of learning from experience - he might also have had a fewunimportant occasions in mind when, unlike his more cautious friends, hehad acted with no thought at all for what might follow and had been madeto suffer for it. He didn't want that to happen again, not this time atleast; if they were play-acting he would act along with them.

He still had time.  "Allow me," he said, and hurried between thetwo policemen through into his room.  "He seems sensible enough," heheard them say behind him.  Once in his room, he quickly pulled open thedrawer of his writing desk, everything in it was very tidy but in hisagitation he was unable to find the identification documents he waslooking for straight away.  He finally found his bicycle permit and wasabout to go back to the policemen with it when it seemed to him toopetty, so he carried on searching until he found his birth certificate.
Just as he got back in the adjoining room the door on the other sideopened and Mrs. Grubach was about to enter.  He only saw her for aninstant, for as soon as she recognised K. she was clearly embarrassed,asked for forgiveness and disappeared, closing the door behind her verycarefully.  "Do come in," K. could have said just then. But now he stoodin the middle of the room with his papers in his hand and still lookingat the door which did not open again.  He stayed like that until he wasstartled out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the littletable at the open window and, as K. now saw, was eating his breakfast.
"Why didn't she come in?" he asked.  "She's not allowed to," said thebig policeman.  "You're under arrest, aren't you."  "But how can I beunder arrest? And how come it's like this?"  "Now you're startingagain," said the policeman, dipping a piece of buttered bread in thehoneypot.  "We don't answer questions like that."  "You will have toanswer them," said K.  "Here are my identification papers, now show meyours and I certainly want to see the arrest warrant."  "Oh, my God!"said the policeman.  "In a position like yours, and you think you canstart giving orders, do you?  It won't do you any good to get us on thewrong side, even if you think it will - we're probably more on your sidethat anyone else you know!"  "That's true, you know, you'd betterbelieve it," said Franz, holding a cup of coffee in his hand which hedid not lift to his mouth but looked at K. in a way that was probablymeant to be full of meaning but could not actually be understood.  K.
found himself, without intending it, in a mute dialogue with Franz, butthen slapped his hand down on his papers and said, "Here are my identitydocuments."  "And what do you want us to do about it?" replied the bigpoliceman, loudly.  "The way you're carrying on, it's worse than achild. What is it you want?  Do you want to get this great, bloody trialof yours over with quickly by talking about ID and arrest warrants withus?  We're just coppers, that's all we are.  Junior officers like ushardly know one end of an ID card from another, all we've got to do withyou is keep an eye on you for ten hours a day and get paid for it.
That's all we are.  Mind you, what we can do is make sure that the highofficials we work for find out just what sort of person it is they'regoing to arrest, and why he should be arrested, before they issue thewarrant.  There's no mistake there.   Our authorities as far as I know,and I only know the lowest grades, don't go out looking for guilt amongthe public; it's the guilt that draws them out, like it says in the law,and they have to send us police officers out.  That's the law. Whered'you think there'd be any mistake there?"  "I don't know this law,"said K.  "So much the worse for you, then," said the policeman.  "It'sprobably exists only in your heads," said K., he wanted, in some way, toinsinuate his way into the thoughts of the policemen, to re-shape thosethoughts to his benefit or to make himself at home there.  But thepoliceman just said dismissively, "You'll find out when it affects you."Franz joined in, and said, "Look at this, Willem, he admits he doesn'tknow the law and at the same time insists he's innocent."  "You're quiteright, but we can't get him to understand a thing," said the other.  K.
stopped talking with them; do I, he thought to himself, do I really haveto carry on getting tangled up with the chattering of base functionarieslike this? - and they admit themselves that they are of the lowestposition.  They're talking about things of which they don't have theslightest understanding, anyway.  It's only because of their stupiditythat they're able to be so sure of themselves.  I just need  few wordswith someone of the same social standing as myself and everything willbe incomparably clearer, much clearer than a long conversation withthese two can make it.  He walked up and down the free space in the rooma couple of times, across the street he could see the old woman who,now, had pulled an old man, much older than herself, up to the windowand had her arms around him.  K. had to put an end to this display,"Take me to your superior," he said.  "As soon as he wants to see you.
Not before," said the policeman, the one called Willem.  "And now myadvice to you," he added, "is to go into your room, stay calm, and waitand see what's to be done with you.  If you take our advice, you won'ttire yourself out thinking about things to no purpose, you need to pullyourself together as there's a lot that's going to required of you.
You've not behaved towards us the way we deserve after being so good toyou, you forget that we, whatever we are, we're still free men andyou're not, and that's quite an advantage.  But in spite of all thatwe're still willing, if you've got the money, to go and get you somebreakfast from the café over the road."
Without giving any answer to this offer, K. stood still for sometime.  Perhaps, if he opened the door of the next room or even the frontdoor, the two of them would not dare to stand in his way, perhaps thatwould be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to ahead.  But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on theground he would lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, hadover them.  So he decided on the more certain solution, the way thingswould go in the natural course of events, and went back in his roomwithout another word either from him or from the policemen.

He threw himself down on his bed, and from the dressing table hetook the nice apple that he had put there the previous evening for hisbreakfast.   Now it was all the breakfast he had and anyway, as heconfirmed as soon as he took his first, big bite of it, it was farbetter than a breakfast he could have had through the good will of thepolicemen from the dirty café.  He felt well and confident, he hadfailed to go into work at the bank this morning but that could easily beexcused because of the relatively high position he held there.  Shouldhe really send in his explanation?   He wondered about it.  If nobodybelieved him, and in this case that would be understandable, he couldbring Mrs. Grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from across thestreet, who probably even now were on their way over to the windowopposite.  It puzzled K., at least it puzzled him looking at it from thepolicemen's point of view, that they had made him go into the room andleft him alone there, where he had ten different ways of killinghimself.  At the same time, though, he asked himself, this time lookingat it from his own point of view, what reason he could have to do so.
Because those two were sitting there in the next room and had taken hisbreakfast, perhaps?  It would have been so pointless to kill himselfthat, even if he had wanted to, the pointlessness would have made himunable.  Maybe, if the policemen had not been so obviously limited intheir mental abilities, it could have been supposed that they had cometo the same conclusion and saw no danger in leaving him alone because ofit.  They could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over tothe cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottle of good schnapps, how hefirst emptied a glass of it in place of his breakfast and how he thentook a second glassful in order to give himself courage, the last onejust as a precaution for the unlikely chance it would be needed.

Then he was so startled by a shout to him from the other room thathe struck his teeth against the glass.  "The supervisor wants to seeyou!" a voice said.  It was only the shout that startled him, this curt,abrupt, military shout, that he would not have expected from thepoliceman called Franz.  In itself, he found the order very welcome.
"At last!" he called back, locked the cupboard and, without delay,hurried into the next room.  The two policemen were standing there andchased him back into his bedroom as if that were a matter of course.
"What d'you think you're doing?" they cried.  "Think you're going to seethe supervisor dressed in just your shirt, do you?  He'd see to it yougot a right thumping, and us and all!"  "Let go of me for God's sake!"called K., who had already been pushed back as far as his wardrobe, "ifyou accost me when I'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in myevening dress."  "That won't help you," said the policemen, who alwaysbecame very quiet, almost sad, when K. began to shout, and in that wayconfused him or, to some extent, brought him to his senses.  "Ridiculousformalities!" he grumbled, as he lifted his coat from the chair and keptit in both his hands for a little while, as if holding it out for thepolicemen's inspection.  They shook their heads.  "It's got to be ablack coat,"  they said.  At that, K. threw the coat to the floor andsaid - without knowing even himself what he meant by it - "Well it's notgoing to be the main trial, after all."  The policemen laughed, butcontinued to insist, "It's got to be a black coat."  "Well that'salright by me if it makes things go any faster," said K.  He opened thewardrobe himself, spent a long time searching through all the clothes,and chose his best black suit which had a short jacket that had greatlysurprised those who knew him, then he also pulled out a fresh shirt andbegan, carefully, to get dressed.  He secretly told himself that he hadsucceeded in speeding things up by letting the policemen forget to makehim have a bath.  He watched them to see if they might remember afterall, but of course it never occurred to them, although Willem did notforget to send Franz up to the supervisor with the message saying thatK. was getting dressed.

Once he was properly dressed, K. had to pass by Willem as he wentthrough the next room into the one beyond, the door of which was alreadywide open.  K. knew very well that this room had recently been let to atypist called 'Miss Bürstner'.  She was in the habit of going out towork very early and coming back home very late, and K. had neverexchanged more than a few words of greeting with her.  Now, her bedsidetable had been pulled into the middle of the room to be used as a deskfor these proceedings, and the supervisor sat behind it.  He had hislegs crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair.

In one corner of the room there were three young people looking atthe photographs belonging to Miss Bürstner that had been put into apiece of fabric on the wall.  Hung up on the handle of the open windowwas a white blouse.  At the window across the street, there was the oldpair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, andfar taller than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that showedhis chest and a reddish goatee beard which he squeezed and twisted withhis fingers.  "Josef K.?" asked the supervisor, perhaps merely toattract K.'s attention as he looked round the room.  K. nodded.  "Idaresay you were quite surprised by all that's been taking place thismorning," said the supervisor as, with both hands, he pushed away thefew items on the bedside table - the candle and box of matches, a bookand a pin cushion which lay there as if they were things he would needfor his own business.  "Certainly," said K., and he began to feelrelaxed now that, at last, he stood in front of someone with some sense,someone with whom he would be able to talk about his situation.
"Certainly I'm surprised, but I'm not in any way very surprised.""You're not very surprised?" asked the supervisor, as he positioned thecandle in the middle of the table and the other things in a group aroundit.  "Perhaps you don't quite understand me," K. hurriedly pointed out.
"What I mean is ..." here K. broke off what he was saying and lookedround for somewhere to sit.  "I may sit down, mayn't I?" he asked.
"That's not usual," the supervisor answered.  "What I mean is...," saidK. without delaying a second time, "that, yes, I am very surprised butwhen you've been in the world for thirty years already and had to makeyour own way through everything yourself, which has been my lot, thenyou become hardened to surprises and don't take them too hard.
Especially not what's happened today."  "Why especially not what'shappened today?"  "I wouldn't want to say that I see all of this as ajoke, you seem to have gone to too much trouble making all thesearrangements for that.  Everyone in the house must be taking part in itas well as all of you, that would be going beyond what could be a joke.
So I don't want to say that this is a joke."  "Quite right," said thesupervisor, looking to see how many matches were left in the box.  "Buton the other hand," K. went on, looking round at everyone there and evenwishing he could get the attention of the three who were looking at thephotographs,  "on the other hand this really can't be all thatimportant.  That follows from the fact that I've been indicted, butcan't think of the slightest  offence for which I could be indicted.
But even that is all beside the point, the main question is: Who isissuing the indictment?  What office is conducting this affair?  Are youofficials?  None of you is wearing a uniform, unless what you arewearing" - here he turned towards Franz - "is meant to be a uniform,it's actually more of a travelling suit.  I require a clear answer toall these questions, and I'm quite sure that once things have been madeclear we can take our leave of each other on the best of terms."   Thesupervisor slammed the box of matches down on the table.  "You're makinga big mistake," he said. "These gentlemen and I have got nothing to dowith your business, in fact we know almost nothing about you.  We couldbe wearing uniforms as proper and exact as you like and your situationwouldn't be any the worse for it.  As to whether you're on a charge, Ican't give you any sort of clear answer to that, I don't even knowwhether you are or not.  You're under arrest, you're quite right aboutthat, but I don't know any more than that.  Maybe these officers havebeen chit-chatting with you, well if they have that's all it is, chit-chat.  I can't give you an answer to your questions, but I can give youa bit of advice: You'd better think less about us and what's going tohappen to you, and think a bit more about yourself.  And stop making allthis fuss about your sense of innocence; you don't make such a badimpression, but with all this fuss you're damaging it.  And you ought todo a bit less talking, too.  Almost everything you've said so far hasbeen things we could have taken from your behaviour, even if you'd saidno more than a few words.  And what you have said has not exactly beenin your favour."
K. stared at the supervisor.  Was this man, probably younger thanhe was, lecturing him like a schoolmaster?  Was he being punished forhis honesty with a telling off?  And was he to learn nothing about thereasons for his arrest or those who were arresting him?  He becamesomewhat cross and began to walk up and down.  No-one stopped him doingthis and he pushed his sleeves back, felt his chest, straightened hishair,  went over to the three men, said, "It makes no sense," at whichthese three turned round to face him and came towards him with seriousexpressions.  He finally came again to a halt in front of thesupervisor's desk.  "State Attorney Hasterer is a good friend of mine,"he said, "can I telephone him?"  "Certainly," said the supervisor, "butI don't know what the point of that will be, I suppose you must havesome private matter you want to discuss with him."  "What the point is?"shouted K., more disconcerted that cross.   "Who do you think you are?You want to see some point in it while you're carrying out something aspointless as it could be?  It's enough to make you cry!  These gentlemenfirst accost me, and now they sit or stand about in here and let me behauled up in front of you.  What point there would be, in telephoning astate attorney when I'm ostensibly under arrest?  Very well, I won'tmake the telephone call."  "You can call him if you want to," said thesupervisor, stretching his hand out towards the outer room where thetelephone was, "please, go on, do make your phone call."  "No, I don'twant to any more," said K., and went over to the window.  Across thestreet, the people were still there at the window, and it was only nowthat K. had gone up to his window that they seemed to become uneasyabout quietly watching what was going on.  The old couple wanted to getup but the man behind them calmed them down.  "We've got some kind ofaudience over there," called K. to the supervisor, quite loudly, as hepointed out with his forefinger.  "Go away," he then called across tothem.  And the three of them did immediately retreat a few steps, theold pair even found themselves behind the man who then concealed themwith the breadth of his body and seemed, going by the movements of hismouth, to be saying something incomprehensible into the distance.  Theydid not disappear entirely, though, but seemed to be waiting for themoment when they could come back to the window without being noticed.
"Intrusive, thoughtless people!" said K. as he turned back into theroom.  The supervisor may have agreed with him, at least K. thought thatwas what he saw from the corner of his eye.  But it was just as possiblethat he had not even been listening as he had his hand pressed firmlydown on the table and seemed to be comparing the length of his fingers.
The two policemen were sitting on a chest covered with a colouredblanket, rubbing their knees.  The three young people had put theirhands on their hips and were looking round aimlessly.  Everything wasstill, like in some office that has been forgotten about.  "Now,gentlemen," called out K., and for a moment it seemed as if he wascarrying all of them on his shoulders, "it looks like your business withme is over with.  In my opinion, it's best now to stop wondering aboutwhether you're proceeding correctly or incorrectly, and to bring thematter to a peaceful close with a mutual handshake.  If you are of thesame opinion, then please..." and he walked up to the supervisor's deskand held out his hand to him.  The supervisor raised his eyes, bit hislip and looked at K.'s outstretched hand; K still believed thesupervisor would do as he suggested.  But instead, he stood up, pickedup a hard round hat that was laying on Miss Bürstner's bed and put itcarefully onto his head, using both hands as if trying on a new hat.
"Everything seems so simple to you, doesn't it," he said to K. as he didso, "so you think we should bring the matter to a peaceful close, doyou.  No, no, that won't do.  Mind you, on the other hand I certainlywouldn't want you to think there's no hope for you.  No, why should youthink that?  You're simply under arrest, nothing more than that.  That'swhat I had to tell you, that's what I've done and now I've seen howyou've taken it.  That's enough for one day and we can take our leave ofeach other, for the time being at least.  I expect you'll want to go into the bank now, won't you."  "In to the bank?" asked K., "I thought Iwas under arrest."   K. said this with a certain amount of defiance as,although his handshake had not been accepted, he was feeling moreindependent of all these people, especially since the supervisor hadstood up.  He was playing with them.  If they left, he had decided hewould run after them and offer to let them arrest him.  That's why heeven repeated, "How can I go in to the bank when I'm under arrest?"  "Isee you've misunderstood me," said the supervisor who was already at thedoor. "It's true that you're under arrest, but that shouldn't stop youfrom carrying out your job.  And there shouldn't be anything to stop youcarrying on with your usual life."  "In that case it's not too bad,being under arrest," said K., and went up close to the supervisor.  "Inever meant it should be anything else," he replied.  "It hardly seemsto have been necessary to notify me of the arrest in that case," said K.,and went even closer.  The others had also come closer. All of them hadgathered together into a narrow space by the door.  "That was my duty,"said the supervisor.  "A silly duty," said K., unyielding.  "Maybe so,"replied the supervisor, "only don't let's waste our time talking on likethis.  I had assumed you'd be wanting to go to the bank.  As you'repaying close attention to every word I'll add this: I'm not forcing youto go to the bank, I'd just assumed you wanted to.  And to make thingseasier for you, and to let you get to the bank with as little fuss aspossible I've put these three gentlemen, colleagues of yours, at yourdisposal."  "What's that?" exclaimed K., and looked at the three inastonishment.  He could only remember seeing them in their group by thephotographs, but these characterless, anaemic young people were indeedofficials from his bank, not colleagues of his, that was putting it toohigh and it showed a gap in the omniscience of the supervisor, but theywere nonetheless junior members of staff at the bank.  How could K. havefailed to see that?  How occupied he must have been with the supervisorand the policemen not to have recognised these three!  Rabensteiner,with his stiff demeanour and swinging hands, Kullich, with his blondehair and deep-set eyes, and Kaminer, with his involuntary grin caused bychronic muscle spasms.  "Good morning," said K. after a while, extendinghis hand to the gentlemen as they bowed correctly to him.  "I didn'trecognise you at all.  So, we'll go into work now, shall we?"  Thegentlemen laughed and nodded enthusiastically, as if that was what theyhad been waiting for all the time, except that K. had left his hat inhis room so they all dashed, one after another, into the room to fetchit, which caused a certain amount of embarrassment.  K. stood where hewas and watched them through the open double doorway, the last to go, ofcourse, was the apathetic Rabensteiner who had broken into no more thanan elegant trot.  Kaminer got to the hat and K., as he often had to doat the bank, forcibly reminded himself that the grin was not deliberate,that he in fact wasn't able to grin deliberately.  At that moment Mrs.
Grubach opened the door from the hallway into the living room where allthe people were.  She did not seem to feel guilty about anything at all,and K., as often before, looked down at the belt of her apron which, forno reason, cut so deeply into her hefty body.  Once downstairs, K., withhis watch in his hand, decided to take a taxi - he had already beendelayed by half an hour and there was no need to make the delay anylonger.  Kaminer ran to the corner to summon it, and the two others weremaking obvious efforts to keep K. diverted when Kullich pointed to thedoorway of the house on the other side of the street where the large manwith the blonde goatee beard appeared and, a little embarrassed at firstat letting himself be seen in his full height, stepped back to the walland leant against it.  The old couple were probably still on the stairs.
K. was cross with Kullich for pointing out this man whom he had alreadyseen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting. "Don't look at him!"he snapped, without noticing how odd it was to speak to free men in thisway.  But there was no explanation needed anyway as just then the taxiarrived, they sat inside and set off.  Inside the taxi, K. rememberedthat he had not noticed the supervisor and the policemen leaving - thesupervisor had stopped him noticing the three bank staff and now thethree bank staff had stopped him noticing the supervisor.  This showedthat K. was not very attentive, and he resolved to watch himself morecarefully in this respect.  Nonetheless, he gave it no thought as hetwisted himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car tocatch sight of the supervisor and the policemen if he could.  But heturned back round straight away and leant comfortably into the corner ofthe taxi without even having made the effort to see anyone.  Although itdid not seem like it, now was just the time when he needed someencouragement, but the gentlemen seemed tired just then, Rabensteinerlooked out of the car to the right, Kullich to the left and only Kaminerwas there with his grin at K.'s service.  It would have been inhumane tomake fun of that.

That spring, whenever possible, K. usually spent his eveningsafter work - he usually stayed in the office until nine o'clock - with ashort walk, either by himself or in the company of some of the bankofficials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at theregulars' table with mostly older men until eleven.  There were,however, also exceptions to this habit, times, for instance, when K. wasinvited by the bank's manager (whom he greatly respected for hisindustry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or toeat dinner with him at his large house.  K. would also go, once a week,to see a girl called Elsa who worked as a waitress in a wine bar throughthe night until late in the morning.  During the daytime she onlyreceived visitors while still in bed.

That evening, though, - the day had passed quickly with a lot ofhard work and many respectful and friendly birthday greetings - K.
wanted to go straight home.  Each time he had any small break from theday's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in mind,that Mrs. Grubach's flat seemed to have been put into great disarray bythe events of that morning, and that it was up to him to put it backinto order.  Once order had been restored, every trace of those eventswould have been erased and everything would take its previous courseonce more.  In particular, there was nothing to fear from the three bankofficials, they had immersed themselves back into their paperwork andthere was no alteration to be seen in them.  K. had called each of them,separately or all together, into his office that day for no other reasonthan to observe them; he was always satisfied and had always been ableto let them go again.

At half past nine that evening, when he arrived back in front ofthe building where he lived, he met a young lad in the doorway who wasstanding there, his legs apart and smoking a pipe.  "Who are you?"immediately asked K., bringing his face close to the lad's, as it washard to see in the half light of the landing.  "I'm the landlord's son,sir," answered the lad, taking the pipe from his mouth and stepping toone side.  "The landlord's son?" asked K., and impatiently knocked onthe ground with his stick.  "Did you want anything, sir?  Would you likeme to fetch my father?"  "No, no," said K., there was somethingforgiving in his voice, as if the boy had harmed him in some way and hewas excusing him.  "It's alright," he said then, and went on, but beforegoing up the stairs he turned round once more.

He could have gone directly to his room, but as he wanted to speakwith Mrs. Grubach he went straight to her door and knocked.  She was satat the table with a knitted stocking and a pile of old stockings infront of her.  K. apologised, a little embarrassed at coming so late,but Mrs. Grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology,she was always ready to speak to him, he knew very well that he was herbest and her favourite tenant.  K. looked round the room, it lookedexactly as it usually did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on thetable by the window that morning, had already been cleared away.  "Awoman's hands will do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, hemight himself have smashed all the dishes on the spot but certainlywould not have been able to carry it all out.  He looked at Mrs. Grubachwith some gratitude.  "Why are you working so late?" he asked.  Theywere now both sitting at the table, and K. now and then sank his handsinto the pile of stockings.  "There's a lot of work to do," she said,"during the day I belong to the tenants; if I'm to sort out my ownthings there are only the evenings left to me."  "I fear I may havecaused you some exceptional work today."  "How do you mean, Mr. K.?" sheasked, becoming more interested and leaving her work in her lap.  "Imean the men who were here this morning."  "Oh, I see," she said, andwent peacefully back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, notespecially."  K. looked on in silence as she took up the knittedstocking once more.  She seems surprised at my mentioning it, hethought, she seems to think it's improper for me to mention it.  All themore important for me to do so.  An old woman is the only person I canspeak about it with.  "But it must have caused some work for you," hesaid then, "but it won't happen again." "No, it can't happen again," sheagreed, and smiled at K. in a way that was almost pained.  "Do you meanthat seriously?" asked K.  "Yes," she said, more gently, "but theimportant thing is you mustn't take it too hard.  There are so manyawful things happening in the world!  As you're being so honest with me,Mr. K., I can admit to you that I listened to a little of what was goingon from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one or twothings as well.  It's all to do with your happiness, and that'ssomething that's quite close to my heart, perhaps more than it should beas I am, after all, only your landlady. Anyway, so I heard one or twothings but I can't really say that it's about anything very serious.
No.  You have been arrested, but it's not in the same way as when theyarrest a thief.  If you're arrested in the same way as a thief, thenit's bad, but an arrest like this ... .  It seems to me that it'ssomething very complicated - forgive me if I'm saying something stupid -something very complicated that I don't understand, but something thatyou don't really need to understand anyway."
"There's nothing stupid about what you've said, Mrs. Grubach, orat least I partly agree with you, only, the way I judge the whole thingis harsher than yours, and think it's not only not something complicatedbut simply a fuss about nothing.  I was just caught unawares, that'swhat happened.  If I had got up as soon as I was awake without lettingmyself get confused because Anna wasn't there, if I'd got up and paid noregard to anyone who might have been in my way and come straight to you,if I'd done something like having my breakfast in the kitchen as anexception, asked you to bring my clothes from my room, in short, if Ihad behaved sensibly then nothing more would have happened, everythingthat was waiting to happen would have been stifled.  People are so oftenunprepared.  In the bank, for example, I am well prepared, nothing ofthis sort could possibly happen to me there, I have my own assistantthere, there are telephones for internal and external calls in front ofme on the desk, I continually receive visits from people,representatives, officials, but besides that, and most importantly, I'malways occupied with my work, that's to say I'm always alert, it wouldeven be a pleasure for me to find myself faced with something of thatsort.  But now it's over with, and I didn't really even want to talkabout it any more, only I wanted to hear what you, as a sensible woman,thought about it all, and I'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement.
But now you must give me your hand, an agreement of this sort needs tobe confirmed with a handshake."
Will she shake hands with me?  The supervisor didn't shake hands,he thought, and looked at the woman differently from before, examiningher.  She stood up, as he had also stood up, and was a little self-conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that K.
said.  As a result of this self consciousness she said something thatshe certainly did not intend and certainly was not appropriate.  "Don'ttake it so hard, Mr. K.," she said, with tears in her voice and also, ofcourse, forgetting the handshake.  "I didn't know I was taking it hard,"said K., feeling suddenly tired and seeing that if this woman did agreewith him it was of very little value.

Before going out the door he asked, "Is Miss Bürstner home?""No," said Mrs. Grubach, smiling as she gave this simple piece ofinformation, saying something sensible at last.  "She's at the theatre.
Did you want to see her?  Should I give her a message?"  "I, er, I justwanted to have a few words with her."  "I'm afraid I don't know whenshe's coming in; she usually gets back late when she's been to thetheatre."  "It really doesn't matter," said K. his head hanging as heturned to the door to leave, "I just wanted to give her my apology fortaking over her room today."  "There's no need for that, Mr. K., you'retoo conscientious, the young lady doesn't know anything about it, shehasn't been home since early this morning and everything's been tidiedup again, you can see for yourself."  And she opened the door to MissBürstner's room.  "Thank you, I'll take your word for it," said K, butwent nonetheless over to the open door.  The moon shone quietly into theunlit room.  As far as could be seen, everything was indeed in itsplace, not even the blouse was hanging on the window handle.  Thepillows on the bed looked remarkably plump as they lay half in themoonlight.  "Miss Bürstner often comes home late," said K., looking atMrs. Grubach as if that were her responsibility.  "That's how youngpeople are!" said Mrs. Grubach to excuse herself.  "Of course, ofcourse," said K., "but it can be taken too far."  "Yes, it can be," saidMrs. Grubach, "you're so right, Mr. K.  Perhaps it is in this case.  Icertainly wouldn't want to say anything nasty about Miss Bürstner, sheis a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, Iappreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to havemore pride, be a bit less forthcoming.  Twice this month already, in thestreet over the way, I've seen her with a different gentleman.  I reallydon't like saying this, you're the only one I've said this to, Mr. K., Iswear to God, but I'm going to have no choice but to have a few wordswith Miss Bürstner about it myself.  And it's not the only thing abouther that I'm worried about."  "Mrs. Grubach, you are on quite the wrongtrack," said K., so angry that he was hardly able to hide it, "and youhave moreover misunderstood what I was saying about Miss Bürstner, thatis not what I meant.  In fact I warn you quite directly not to sayanything to her, you are quite mistaken, I know Miss Bürstner very welland there is no truth at all in what you say.  And what's more, perhapsI'm going to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whateveryou see fit.  Good night."  "Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach as if asking himfor something and hurrying to his door which he had already opened, "Idon't want to speak to Miss Bürstner at all, not yet, of course I'llcontinue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one I've told what Iknow.  And it is, after all something that everyone who lets rooms hasto do if she's to keep the house decent, that's all I'm trying to do.""Decent!" called out K. through the crack in the door, "if you want tokeep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice."  Then heslammed the door shut, there was a gentle knocking to which he paid nomore attention.

He did not feel at all like going to bed, so he decided to stayup, and this would also give him the chance to find out when MissBürstner would arrive home.  Perhaps it would also still be possible,even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her.  As he laythere by the window, pressing his hands to his tired eyes, he eventhought for a moment that he might punish Mrs. Grubach by persuadingMiss Bürstner to give in her notice at the same time as he would.  Buthe immediately realised that that would be shockingly excessive, andthere would even be the suspicion that he was moving house because ofthe incidents of that morning.  Nothing would have been more nonsensicaland, above all, more pointless and contemptible.

When he had become tired of looking out onto the empty street heslightly opened the door to the living room so that he could see anyonewho entered the flat from where he was and lay down on the couch.  Helay there, quietly smoking a cigar, until about eleven o'clock.  Hewasn't able to hold out longer than that, and went a little way into thehallway as if in that way he could make Miss Bürstner arrive sooner.  Hehad no particular desire for her, he could not even remember what shelooked like, but now he wanted to speak to her and it irritated him thather late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease anddisorder right to its very end.  It was also her fault that he had nothad any dinner that evening and that he had been unable to visit Elsa ashe had intended.  He could still make up for both of those things,though, if he went to the wine bar where Elsa worked.  He wanted to doso even later, after the discussion with Miss Bürstner.

It was already gone half past eleven when someone could be heardin the stairway.  K., who had been lost in his thoughts in the hallway,walking up and down loudly as if it were his own room, fled behind hisdoor.  Miss Bürstner had arrived.  Shivering, she pulled a silk shawlover her slender shoulders as she locked the door.  The next moment shewould certainly go into her room, where K. ought not to intrude in themiddle of the night; that meant he would have to speak to her now, but,unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so thatwhen he stepped out of the dark it would give the impression of being anattack and would certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming.
There was no time to lose, and in his helplessness he whispered throughthe crack of the door, "Miss Bürstner."  It sounded like he was pleadingwith her, not calling to her.  "Is there someone there?" asked MissBürstner, looking round with her eyes wide open.  "It's me," said K. andcame out.  "Oh, Mr. K.!" said Miss Bürstner with a smile. "GoodEvening," and offered him her hand.  "I wanted to have a word with you,if you would allow me?"  "Now?" asked Miss Bürstner, "does it have to benow? It is a little odd, isn't it?"  "I've been waiting for you sincenine o'clock."  "Well, I was at the theatre, I didn't know anythingabout you waiting for me."  "The reason I need to speak to you only cameup today"  "I see, well I don't see why not, I suppose, apart from beingso tired I could drop.  Come into my room for a few minutes then.  Wecertainly can't talk out here, we'd wake everyone up and I think thatwould be more unpleasant for us than for them.  Wait here till I've putthe light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here."  K. didas he was told, and then even waited until Miss Bürstner came out of herroom and quietly invited him, once more, to come in.  "Sit down," shesaid, indicating the ottoman, while she herself remained standing by thebedpost despite the tiredness she had spoken of; she did not even takeoff her hat, which was small but decorated with an abundance of flowers.
"What is it you wanted, then?  I'm really quite curious."  She gentlycrossed her legs.
"I expect you'll say," K. began, "that the matter really isn't all thaturgent and we don't need to talk about it right now, but ..."  "I neverlisten to introductions," said Miss Bürstner.  "That makes my job somuch easier," said K.  "This morning, to some extent through my fault,your room was made a little untidy, this happened because of people Idid not know and against my will but, as I said, because of my fault; Iwanted to apologise for it."  "My room?" asked Miss Bürstner, andinstead of looking round the room scrutinised K.  "It is true," said K.,and now, for the first time, they looked each other in the eyes,"there's no point in saying exactly how this came about."  "But that'sthe interesting thing about it," said Miss Bürstner.  "No," said K.
"Well then," said Miss Bürstner, "I don't want to force my way into anysecrets, if you insist that it's of no interest I won't insist.  I'mquite happy to forgive you for it, as you ask, especially as I can't seeanything at all that's been left untidy."  With her hand laid flat onher lower hip, she made a tour around the room.  At the mat where thephotographs were she stopped.  "Look at this!" she cried.  "Myphotographs really have been put in the wrong places.  Oh, that'shorrible.  Someone really has been in my room without permission."  K.
nodded, and quietly cursed Kaminer who worked at his bank and who wasalways active doing things that had neither use nor purpose.  "It isodd," said Miss Bürstner, "that I'm forced to forbid you to do somethingthat you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, namely to come into myroom when I'm not here."  "But I did explain to you," said K., and wentover to join her by the photographs, "that it wasn't me who interferedwith your photographs; but as you don't believe me I'll have to admitthat the investigating committee brought along three bank employees withthem, one of them must have touched your photographs and as soon as Iget the chance I'll ask to have him dismissed from the bank.  Yes, therewas an investigating committee here," added K., as the young lady waslooking at him enquiringly.  "Because of you?" she asked.  "Yes,"answered K.  "No!" the lady cried with a laugh.  "Yes, they were," saidK., "you believe that I'm innocent then, do you?"  "Well now, innocent..." said the lady, "I don't want to start making any pronouncementsthat might have serious consequences, I don't really know you after all,it means they're dealing with a serious criminal if they send aninvestigating committee straight out to get him.  But you're not incustody now - at least I take it you've not escaped from prisonconsidering that you seem quite calm - so you can't have committed anycrime of that sort."  "Yes," said K., "but it might be that theinvestigating committee could see that I'm innocent, or not so guilty ashad been supposed."  "Yes, that's certainly a possibility," said MissBürstner, who seemed very interested.  "Listen," said K., "you don'thave much experience in legal matters."  "No, that's true, I don't,"said Miss Bürstner, "and I've often regretted it, as I'd like to knoweverything and I'm very interested in legal matters.  There's somethingpeculiarly attractive about the law, isn't there?  But I'll certainly beperfecting my knowledge in this area, as next month I start work in alegal office."  "That's very good," said K., "that means you'll be ableto give me some help with my trial."  "That could well be," said MissBürstner, "why not?  I like to make use of what I know."  "I mean itquite seriously," said K., "or at least, half seriously, as you do.
This affair is too petty to call in a lawyer, but I could make good useof someone who could give me advice."  "Yes, but if I'm to give youadvice I'll have to know what it's all about," said Miss Bürstner.
"That's exactly the problem," said K., "I don't know that myself."  "Soyou have been making fun of me, then," said Miss Bürstner exceedinglydisappointed, "you really ought not to try something like that on atthis time of night."  And she stepped away from the photographs wherethey had stood so long together.  "Miss Bürstner, no," said K., "I'm notmaking fun of you.  Please believe me!  I've already told you everythingI know.  More than I know, in fact, as it actually wasn't even aninvestigating committee, that's just what I called them because I don'tknow what else to call them.  There was no cross questioning at all, Iwas merely arrested, but by a committee."  Miss Bürstner sat on theottoman and laughed again.  "What was it like then?" she asked.  "It wasterrible" said K., although his mind was no longer on the subject, hehad become totally absorbed by Miss Bürstner's gaze who was supportingher chin on one hand - the elbow rested on the cushion of the ottoman -and slowly stroking her hip with the other.  "That's too vague," saidMiss Bürstner.  "What's too vague?" asked K.  Then he remembered himselfand asked, "Would you like me to show you what it was like?"  He wantedto move in some way but did not want to leave.  "I'm already tired,"said Miss Bürstner.  "You arrived back so late," said K.  "Now you'vestarted telling me off.  Well I suppose I deserve it as I shouldn't havelet you in here in the first place, and it turns out there wasn't evenany point."  "Oh, there was a point, you'll see now how important apoint it was," said K.  "May I move this table away from your bedsideand put it here?"  "What do you think you're doing?" said Miss Bürstner.
"Of course you can't!"  "In that case I can't show you," said K., quiteupset, as if Miss Bürstner had committed some incomprehensible offenceagainst him.  "Alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, justtake the bedside table then," said Miss Bürstner, and after a shortpause added in a weak voice,  "I'm so tired I'm allowing more than Iought to."  K. put the little table in the middle of the room and satdown behind it.  "You have to get a proper idea of where the people weresituated, it is very interesting.  I'm the supervisor, sitting overthere on the chest are two policemen, standing next to the photographsthere are three young people.  Hanging on the handle of the window is awhite blouse - I just mention that by the way.  And now it begins.  Ahyes, I'm forgetting myself, the most important person of all, so I'mstanding here in front of the table.  The supervisor is sittingextremely comfortably with his legs crossed and his arm hanging over thebackrest here like some layabout.  And now it really does begin.  Thesupervisor calls out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shouts atme, I'm afraid, if I'm to make it clear to you, I'll have to shout aswell, and it's nothing more than my name that he shouts out."  MissBürstner, laughing as she listened to him, laid her forefinger on hermouth so that K. would not shout, but it was too late.  K. was tooengrossed in his role and slowly called out, "Josef K.!".  It was not asloud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had suddenly calledit out, the cry seemed gradually to spread itself all round the room.

There was a series of loud, curt and regular knocks at the door ofthe adjoining room.  Miss Bürstner went pale and laid her hand on herheart.  K. was especially startled, as for a moment he had been quiteunable to think of anything other than the events of that morning andthe girl for whom he was performing them.  He had hardly pulled himselftogether when he jumped over to Miss Bürstner and took her hand.  "Don'tbe afraid," he whispered, "I'll put everything right.  But who can itbe?  It's only the living room next door, nobody sleeps in there."  "Yesthey do," whispered Miss Bürstner into K.'s ear, "a nephew of Mrs.
Grubach's, an captain in the army, has been sleeping there sinceyesterday.  There's no other room free.  I'd forgotten about it too.
Why did you have to shout like that?  You've made me quite upset.""There is no reason for it," said K., and, now as she sank back onto thecushion, kissed her forehead.  "Go away, go away," she said, hurriedlysitting back up, "get out of here, go, what is it you want, he'slistening at the door he can hear everything.  You're causing me so muchtrouble!"  "I won't go," said K., "until you've calmed down a bit.  Comeover into the other corner of the room, he won't be able to hear usthere."  She let him lead her there. "Don't forget," he said, "althoughthis might be unpleasant for you you're not in any real danger.  Youknow how much esteem Mrs. Grubach has for  me, she's the one who willmake all the decisions in this, especially as the captain is her nephew,but she believes everything I say without question.  What's more, shehas borrowed a large sum of money from me and that makes her dependenton me.  I will confirm whatever you say to explain our being heretogether, however inappropriate it might be, and I guarantee to makesure that Mrs. Grubach will not only say she believes the explanation inpublic but will believe it truly and sincerely.  You will have no needto consider me in any way.  If you wish to let it be known that I haveattacked you then Mrs. Grubach will be informed of such and she willbelieve it without even losing her trust in me, that's how much respectshe has for me."  Miss Bürstner looked at the floor in front of her,quiet and a little sunk in on herself.  "Why would Mrs. Grubach notbelieve that I've attacked you?" added K. He looked at her hair in frontof him, parted, bunched down, reddish and firmly held in place.  Hethought she would look up at him, but without changing her manner shesaid, "Forgive me, but it was the suddenness of the knocking thatstartled me so much, not so much what the consequences of the captainbeing here might be.  It was all so quiet after you'd shouted, and thenthere was the knocking, that's was made me so shocked, and I was sittingright by the door, the knocking was right next to me.  Thank you foryour suggestions, but I won't accept them.  I can bear theresponsibility for anything that happens in my room myself, and I can doso with anyone.  I'm surprised you don't realise just how insulting yoursuggestions are and what they imply about me, although I certainlyacknowledge your good intentions.  But now, please go, leave me alone, Ineed you to go now even more than I did earlier.  The couple of minutesyou asked for have grown into half an hour, more than half an hour now."K. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist, "You're not cross withme, though?" he said.  She pulled her hand away and answered, "No, no,I'm never cross with anyone."  He grasped her wrist once more, shetolerated it now and, in that way, lead him to the door.  He had fullyintended to leave.  But when he reached the door he came to a halt as ifhe hadn't expected to find a door there, Miss Bürstner made use of thatmoment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway andgently say to K. from there, "Now, come along, please.  Look," shepointed to the captain's door, from under which there was a lightshining, "he's put a light on and he's laughing at us."  "Alright, I'mcoming," said K., moved forward, took hold of her, kissed her on themouth and then over her whole face like a thirsty animal lapping withits tongue when it eventually finds water.  He finally kissed her on herneck and her throat and left his lips pressed there for a long time.  Hedid not look up until there was a noise from the captain's room.  "I'llgo now," he said, he wanted to address Miss Bürstner by her Christianname, but did not know it.  She gave him a tired nod, offered him herhand to kiss as she turned away as if she did not know what she wasdoing, and went back into her room with her head bowed.  A short whilelater, K. was lying in his bed. He very soon went to sleep, but beforehe did he thought a little while about his behaviour, he was satisfiedwith it but felt some surprise that he was not more satisfied; he wasseriously worried about Miss Bürstner because of the captain.




Chapter TwoFirst Cross-examination
K. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearingconcerning his case the following Sunday. He was made aware that thesecross examinations would follow one another regularly, perhaps not everyweek but quite frequently. On the one hand it was in everyone's interestto bring proceedings quickly to their conclusion, but on the other handevery aspect of the examinations had to be carried out thoroughlywithout lasting too long because of the associated stress.  For thesereasons, it had been decided to hold a series of brief examinationsfollowing on one after another.  Sunday had been chosen as the day forthe hearings so that K. would not be disturbed in his professional work.
It was assumed that he would be in agreement with this, but if he wishedfor another date then, as far as possible, he would be accommodated.
Cross-examinations could even be held in the night, for instance, but K.
would probably not be fresh enough at that time.  Anyway, as long as K.
made no objection, the hearing would be left on Sundays.  It was amatter of course that he would have to appear without fail, there wasprobably no need to point this out to him.  He would be given the numberof the building where he was to present himself, which was in a streetin a suburb well away from the city centre which K. had never been tobefore.

Once he had received this notice, K. hung up the receiver withoutgiving an answer; he had decided immediately to go there that Sunday, itwas certainly necessary, proceedings had begun and he had to face up toit, and this first examination would probably also be the last.  He wasstill standing in thought by the telephone when he heard the voice ofthe deputy director behind him - he wanted to use the telephone but K.
stood in his way.  "Bad news?" asked the deputy director casually, notin order to find anything out but just to get K. away from the device.
"No, no," said K., he stepped to one side but did not go away entirely.
The deputy director picked up the receiver and, as he waited for hisconnection, turned away from it and said to K.,  "One question, Mr. K.:Would you like to give me the pleasure of joining me on my sailing boaton Sunday morning?  There's quite a few people coming, you're bound toknow some of them.  One of them is Hasterer, the state attorney.  Wouldyou like to come along?  Do come along!"  K. tried to pay attention towhat the deputy director was saying.  It was of no small importance forhim, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he had nevergot on very well, meant that he was trying to improve his relations withhim.  It showed how important K. had become in the bank and how itssecond most important official seemed to value his friendship, or atleast his impartiality.  He was only speaking at the side of thetelephone receiver while he waited for his connection, but in givingthis invitation the deputy director was humbling himself.  But K. wouldhave to humiliate him a second time as a result, he said, "Thank youvery much, but I'm afraid I will have no time on Sunday, I have aprevious obligation."  "Pity," said the deputy director, and turned tothe telephone conversation that had just been connected.  It was not ashort conversation, but K., remained standing confused by the instrumentall the time it was going on.  It was only when the deputy director hungup that he was shocked into awareness and said, in order to partiallyexcuse his standing there for no reason, "I've just received a telephonecall, there's somewhere I need to go, but they forgot to tell me whattime."  "Ask them then," said the deputy director.  "It's not thatimportant," said K., although in that way his earlier excuse, alreadyweak enough, was made even weaker.  As he went, the deputy directorcontinued to speak about other things.  K. forced himself to answer, buthis thoughts were mainly about that Sunday, how it would be best to getthere for nine o'clock in the morning as that was the time that courtsalways start work on weekdays.

The weather was dull on Sunday.  K. was very tired, as he hadstayed out drinking until late in the night celebrating with some of theregulars, and he had almost overslept.  He dressed hurriedly, withoutthe time to think and assemble the various plans he had worked outduring the week.  With no breakfast, he rushed to the suburb he had beentold about.  Oddly enough, although he had little time to look aroundhim, he came across the three bank officials involved in his case,Rabensteiner, Kullich and Kaminer.  The first two were travelling in atram that went across K.'s route, but Kaminer sat on the terrace of acafé and leant curiously over the wall as K. came over.  All of themseemed to be looking at him, surprised at seeing their superior running;it was  a kind of pride that made K. want to go on foot, this was hisaffair and the idea of any help from strangers, however slight, wasrepulsive to him, he also wanted to avoid asking for anyone's helpbecause that would initiate them into the affair even if only slightly.
And after all, he had no wish at all to humiliate himself before thecommittee by being too punctual.  Anyway, now he was running so that hewould get there by nine o'clock if at all possible, even though he hadno appointment for this time.

He had thought that he would recognise the building from adistance by some kind of sign, without knowing exactly what the signwould look like, or from some particular kind of activity outside theentrance.  K. had been told that the building was in Juliusstrasse, butwhen he stood at the street's entrance it consisted on each side ofalmost nothing but monotonous, grey constructions, tall blocks of flatsoccupied by poor people.  Now, on  a Sunday morning, most of the windowswere occupied, men in their shirtsleeves leant out smoking, or carefullyand gently held small children on the sills.  Other windows were piledup with bedding, above which the dishevelled head of a woman wouldbriefly appear.  People called out to each other across the street, oneof the calls provoked a loud laugh about K. himself.  It was a longstreet, and spaced evenly along it were small shops below street level,selling various kinds of foodstuffs, which you reached by going down afew steps.  Women went in and out of them or stood chatting on thesteps.  A fruitmonger, taking his goods up to the windows, was just asinattentive as K. and nearly knocked him down with his cart.  Just then,a gramophone, which in better parts of town would have been seen as wornout, began to play some murderous tune.

K. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenty oftime now, or as if the examining magistrate were looking at him from oneof the windows and therefore knew that K. had found his way there.  Itwas shortly after nine.  The building was quite far down the street, itcovered so much area it was almost extraordinary, and the gateway inparticular was tall and long.  It was clearly intended for deliverywagons belonging to the various warehouses all round the yard which werenow locked up and carried the names of companies some of which K. knewfrom his work at the bank.  In contrast with his usual habits, heremained standing a while at the entrance to the yard taking in allthese external details.  Near him, there was a bare-footed man sittingon a crate and reading a newspaper.  There were two lads swinging on ahand cart.  In front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacketwho, as the water flowed into her can, looked at K.  There was a pieceof rope stretched between two windows in a corner of the yard, with somewashing hanging on it to dry.  A man stood below it calling outinstructions to direct the work being done.

K. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hearingwas to take place, but then stood still again as besides these steps hecould see three other stairway entrances, and there also seemed to be asmall passageway at the end of the yard leading into a second yard.  Itirritated him that he had not been given more precise directions to theroom, it meant they were either being especially neglectful with him orespecially indifferent, and he decided to make that clear to them veryloudly and very unambiguously.  In the end he decided to climb up thestairs, his thoughts playing on something that he remembered thepoliceman, Willem, saying to him; that the court is attracted by theguilt, from which it followed that the courtroom must be on the stairwaythat K. selected by chance.

As he went up he disturbed a large group of children playing onthe stairs who looked at him as he stepped through their rows.  "Nexttime I come here," he said to himself, "I must either bring sweets withme to make them like me or a stick to hit them with."  Just before hereached the first landing he even had to wait a little while until aball had finished its movement, two small lads with sly faces likegrown-up scoundrels held him by his trouser-legs until it had; if hewere to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid ofwhat noise they would make by shouting.

On the first floor, his search began for real.  He still feltunable to ask for the investigating committee, and so he invented ajoiner called Lanz - that name occurred to him because the captain, Mrs.
Grubach's nephew, was called Lanz - so that he could ask at every flatwhether Lanz the joiner lived there and thus obtain a chance to lookinto the rooms.  It turned out, though, that that was mostly possiblewithout further ado, as almost all the doors were left open and thechildren ran in and out.  Most of them were small, one-windowed roomswhere they also did the cooking.  Many women held babies in one arm andworked at the stove with the other.   Half grown girls, who seemed to bedressed in just their pinafores worked hardest running to and fro.  Inevery room, the beds were still in use by people who were ill, or stillasleep, or people stretched out on them in their clothes.  K. knocked atthe flats where the doors were closed and asked whether Lanz the joinerlived there.   It was usually a woman who opened the door, heard theenquiry and turned to somebody in the room who would raise himself fromthe bed.  "The gentleman's asking if a joiner called Lanz, lives here.""A joiner, called Lanz?" he would ask from the bed."  "That's right," K.
would say, although it was clear that the investigating committee wasnot to be found there, and so his task was at an end.  There were manywho thought it must be very important for K. to find Lanz the joiner andthought long about it, naming a joiner who was not called Lanz or givinga name that had some vague similarity with Lanz, or they askedneighbours or accompanied K. to a door a long way away where theythought someone of that sort might live in the back part of the buildingor where someone would be who could advise K. better than they couldthemselves.  K. eventually had to give up asking if he did not want tobe led all round from floor to floor in this way.  He regretted hisinitial plan, which had at first seemed so practical to him.  As hereached the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took hisleave of a friendly, young worker who wanted to lead him on stillfurther and went down the stairs.  But then the thought of how much timehe was wasting made him cross, he went back again and knocked at thefirst door on the fifth floor.  The first thing he saw in the small roomwas a large clock on the wall which already showed ten o'clock.  "Isthere a joiner called Lanz who lives here?" he asked.  "Pardon?" said ayoung woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment, washingchildren's underclothes in a bucket.  She pointed her wet hand towardsthe open door of the adjoining room.

K. thought he had stepped into a meeting.  A medium sized, twowindowed room was filled with the most diverse crowd of people - nobodypaid any attention to the person who had just entered.  Close under itsceiling it was surrounded by a gallery which was also fully occupied andwhere the people could only stand bent down with their heads and theirbacks touching the ceiling.  K., who found the air too stuffy, steppedout again and said to the young woman, who had probably misunderstoodwhat he had said, "I asked for a joiner, someone by the name of Lanz.""Yes," said the woman, "please go on in."  K. would probably not havefollowed her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the doorhandle and said, "I'll have to close the door after you, no-one elsewill be allowed in."  "Very sensible," said K., "but it's too fullalready."  But then he went back in anyway.  He passed through betweentwo men who were talking beside the door - one of them held both handsfar out in front of himself making the movements of counting out money,the other looked him closely in the eyes - and someone took him by thehand.  It was a small, red-faced youth.  "Come in, come in," he said.
K. let himself be led by him, and it turned out that there was -surprisingly in a densely packed crowd of people moving to and fro - anarrow passage which may have been the division between two factions;this idea was reinforced by the fact that in the first few rows to theleft and the right of him there was hardly any face looking in hisdirection, he saw nothing but the backs of people directing their speechand their movements only towards members of their own side.  Most ofthem were dressed in black, in old, long, formal frock coats that hungdown loosely around them.  These clothes were the only thing thatpuzzled  K., as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for alocal political meeting.

At the other end of the hall where K. had been led there was alittle table set at an angle on a very low podium which was asovercrowded as everywhere else, and behind the table, near the edge ofthe podium, sat a small, fat, wheezing man who was talking with someonebehind him.  This second man was standing with his legs crossed and hiselbows on the backrest of the chair, provoking much laughter.  From timeto time he threw his arm in the air as if doing a caricature of someone.
The youth who was leading K. had some difficulty in reporting to theman.  He had already tried twice to tell him something, standing on tip-toe, but without getting the man's attention as he sat there above him.
It was only when one of the people up on the podium drew his attentionto the youth that the man turned to him and leant down to hear what itwas he quietly said.  Then he pulled out his watch and quickly lookedover at K.  "You should have been here one hour and five minutes ago,"he said.  K. was going to give him a reply but had no time to do so, ashardly had the man spoken than a general muttering arose all over theright hand side of the hall.  "You should have been here one hour andfive minutes ago," the man now repeated, raising his voice this time,and quickly looked round the hall beneath him.  The muttering alsobecame immediately louder and, as the man said nothing more, died awayonly gradually.  Now the hall was much quieter than when K. had entered.
Only the people up in the gallery had not stopped passing remarks.  Asfar as could be distinguished, up in the half-darkness, dust and haze,they seemed to be less well dressed than those below.  Many of them hadbrought pillows that they had put between their heads and the ceiling sothat they would not hurt themselves pressed against it.

K. had decided he would do more watching than talking, so he didnot defend himself for supposedly having come late, and simply said,"Well maybe I have arrived late, I'm here now."  There followed loudapplause, once more from the right hand side of the hall.  Easy peopleto get on your side, thought K., and was bothered only by the quiet fromthe left hand side which was directly behind him and from which therewas applause from only a few individuals.  He wondered what he could sayto get all of them to support him together or, if that were notpossible, to at least get the support of the others for a while.

"Yes," said the man, "but I'm now no longer under any obligationto hear your case" - there was once more a muttering, but this time itwas misleading as the man waved the people's objections aside with hishand and continued - "I will, however, as an exception, continue with ittoday.  But you should never arrive late like this again.  And now, stepforward!"  Someone jumped down from the podium so that there would be aplace free for K., and K. stepped up onto it.  He stood pressed closelyagainst the table, the press of the crowd behind him was so great thathe had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge'sdesk down off the podium and perhaps the judge along with it.

The judge, however, paid no attention to that but sat verycomfortably on his chair and, after saying a few words to close hisdiscussion with the man behind him, reached for a little note book, theonly item on his desk.  It was like an old school exercise book and hadbecome quite misshapen from much thumbing.  "Now then," said the judge,thumbing through the book. He turned to K. with the tone of someone whoknows his facts and said, "you are a house painter?"  "No," said K., "Iam the chief clerk in a large bank."  This reply was followed bylaughter among the right hand faction down in the hall, it was so heartythat K. couldn't stop himself joining in with it.  The people supportedthemselves with their hands on their knees and shook as if suffering aserious attack of coughing.  Even some of those in the gallery werelaughing.  The judge had become quite cross but seemed to have no powerover those below him in the hall, he tried to reduce what harm had beendone in the gallery and jumped up threatening them, his eyebrows, untilthen hardly remarkable, pushed themselves up and became big, black andbushy over his eyes.

The left hand side of the hall was still quiet, though, the peoplestood there in rows with their faces looking towards the podiumlistening to what was being said there, they observed the noise from theother side of the hall with the same quietness and even allowed someindividuals from their own ranks, here and there, to go forward into theother faction.  The people in the left faction were not only fewer innumber than the right but probably were no more important than them,although their behaviour was calmer and that made it seem like theywere.  When K. now began to speak he was convinced he was doing it inthe same way as them.

"Your question, My Lord, as to whether I am a house painter - infact even more than that, you did not ask at all but merely imposed iton me - is symptomatic of the whole way these proceedings against me arebeing carried out.   Perhaps you will object that there are noproceedings against me.  You will be quite right, as there areproceedings only if I acknowledge that there are.  But, for the moment,I do acknowledge it, out of pity for yourselves to a large extent.  It'simpossible not to observe all this business without feeling pity.  Idon't say things are being done without due care but I would like tomake it clear that it is I who make the acknowledgement."
K. stopped speaking and looked down into the hall.  He had spokensharply, more sharply than he had intended, but he had been quite right.
It should have been rewarded with some applause here and there buteverything was quiet, they were all clearly waiting for what wouldfollow, perhaps the quietness was laying the ground for an outbreak ofactivity that would bring this whole affair to an end.  It was somewhatdisturbing that just then the door at the end of the hall opened, theyoung washerwoman, who seemed to have finished her work, came in and,despite all her caution, attracted the attention of some of the peoplethere.  It was only the judge who gave K. any direct pleasure, as heseemed to have been immediately struck by K.'s words.  Until then, hehad listened to him standing, as K.'s speech had taken him by surprisewhile he was directing his attention to the gallery.  Now, in the pause,he sat down very slowly, as if he did not want anyone to notice.  Hetook out the notebook again, probably so that he could give theimpression of being calmer.

"That won't help you, sir," continued K., "even your little bookwill only confirm what I say."  K. was satisfied to hear nothing but hisown quiet words in this room full of strangers, and he even daredcasually to pick up the examining judge's notebook and, touching it onlywith the tips of his fingers as if it were something revolting, liftedit in the air, holding it just by one of the middle pages so that theothers on each side of it, closely written, blotted and yellowing,flapped down.  "Those are the official notes of the examining judge," hesaid, and let the notebook fall down onto the desk.  "You can read inyour book as much as you like, sir, I really don't have anything in thischarge book to be afraid of, even though I don't have access to it as Iwouldn't want it in my hand, I can only touch it with two fingers."  Thejudge grabbed the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk - whichcould only have been a sign of his deep humiliation, or at least that ishow it must have been perceived - tried to tidy it up a little, and heldit once more in front of himself in order to read from it.

The people in the front row looked up at him, showing such tensionon their faces that he looked back down at them for some time.  Everyone of them was an old man, some of them with white beards.  Could theyperhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembly one wayor the other?  They had sunk into a state of  motionlessness while K.
gave his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from thispassivity even when the judge was being humiliated.  "What has happenedto me," continued K., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, hecontinually scanned the faces in the first row, and this gave hisaddress a somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happenedto me is not just an isolated case.  If it were it would not be of muchimportance as it's not of much importance to me, but it is a symptom ofproceedings which are carried out against many.  It's on behalf of themthat I stand here now, not for myself alone."
Without having intended it, he had raised his voice.  Somewhere inthe hall, someone raised his hands and applauded him shouting, "Bravo!Why not then?  Bravo!  Again I say, Bravo!"  Some of the men in thefirst row groped around in their beards, none of them looked round tosee who was shouting.  Not even K. thought him of any importance but itdid raise his spirits; he no longer thought it at all necessary that allof those in the hall should applaud him, it was enough if the majorityof them began  to think about the matter and if only one of them, nowand then, was persuaded.

"I'm not trying to be a successful orator," said K. after thisthought, "that's probably more than I'm capable of anyway.  I'm sure theexamining judge can speak far better than I can, it is part of his jobafter all.  All that I want is a public discussion of a public wrong.
Listen: ten days ago I was placed under arrest, the arrest itself issomething I laugh about but that's beside the point.  They came for mein the morning when I was still in bed.  Maybe the order had been givento arrest some house painter - that seems possible after what the judgehas said - someone who is as innocent as I am, but it was me they chose.
There were two police thugs occupying the next room.  They could nothave taken better precautions if I had been a dangerous robber.  Andthese policemen were unprincipled riff-raff, they talked at me till Iwas sick of it, they wanted bribes, they wanted to trick me into givingthem my clothes, they wanted money, supposedly so that they could bringme my breakfast after they had blatantly eaten my own breakfast in frontof my eyes.  And even that was not enough.  I was led in front of thesupervisor in another room.  This was the room of a lady who I have alot of respect for, and I was forced to look on while the supervisor andthe policemen made quite a mess of this room because of me, although notthrough any fault of mine.  It was not easy to stay calm, but I managedto do so and was completely calm when I asked the supervisor why it wasthat I was under arrest.  If he were here he would have to confirm whatI say.  I can see him now, sitting on the chair belonging to that lady Imentioned - a picture of dull-witted arrogance.  What do you think heanswered?  What he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all;perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest andwas satisfied.  In fact he had done more than that and brought threejunior employees from the bank where I work into the lady's room; theyhad made themselves busy interfering with some photographs that belongedto the lady and causing a mess.  There was, of course, another reasonfor bringing these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid,were expected to spread the news of my arrest and damage my publicreputation and in particular to remove me from my position at the bank.
Well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even mylandlady, who is quite a simple person - and I will give you here hername in full respect, her name is Mrs. Grubach - even Mrs. Grubach wasunderstanding enough to see that an arrest like this has no moresignificance than an attack carried out on the street by some youths whoare not kept under proper control.  I repeat, this whole affair hascaused me nothing but unpleasantness and temporary irritation, but couldit not also have had some far worse consequences?"
K. broke off here and looked at the judge, who said nothing.  Ashe did so he thought he saw the judge use a movement of his eyes to givea sign to someone in the crowd.  K. smiled and said, "And now the judge,right next to me, is giving a secret sign to someone among you.  Thereseems to be someone among you who is taking directions from above.  Idon't know whether the sign is meant to produce booing or applause, butI'll resist trying to guess what its meaning is too soon.  It reallydoesn't matter to me, and I give his lordship the judge my full andpublic permission to stop giving secret signs to his paid subordinatedown there and give his orders in words instead; let him just say "Boonow!," and then the next time "Clap now!".

Whether it was embarrassment or impatience, the judge rockedbackwards and forwards on his seat.  The man behind him, whom he hadbeen talking with earlier, leant forward again, either to give him a fewgeneral words of encouragement or some specific piece of advice.  Belowthem in the hall the people talked to each other quietly but animatedly.
The two factions  had earlier seemed to hold views strongly opposed toeach other but now they began to intermingle, a few individuals pointedup at K., others pointed at the judge.   The air in the room was fuggyand extremely oppressive, those who were standing furthest away couldhardly even be seen through it.  It must have been especiallytroublesome for those visitors who were in the gallery, as they wereforced to quietly ask the participants in the assembly what exactly washappening, albeit with timid glances at the judge.  The replies theyreceived were just as quiet, and given behind the protection of a raisedhand.

"I have nearly finished what I have to say," said K., and as therewas no bell available he struck the desk with his fist in a way thatstartled the judge and his advisor and made them look up from eachother.  "None of this concerns me, and I am therefore able to make a calmassessment of it, and, assuming that this so-called court is of any realimportance, it will be very much to your advantage to listen to what Ihave to say.  If you want to discuss what I say, please don't bother towrite it down until later on, I don't have any time to waste and I'llsoon be leaving."
There was immediate silence, which showed how well K. was incontrol of the crowd.  There were no shouts among them as there had beenat the start, no-one even applauded, but if they weren't alreadypersuaded they seemed very close to it.

K was pleased at the tension among all the people there as theylistened to him, a rustling rose from the silence which was moreinvigorating than the most ecstatic applause could have been.  "There isno doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enormous organisationdetermining what is said by this court.  In my case this includes myarrest and the examination taking place here today, an organisation thatemploys policemen who can be bribed, oafish supervisors and judges ofwhom nothing better can be said than that they are not as arrogant assome others.  This organisation even maintains a high-level judiciaryalong with its train of countless servants, scribes, policemen and allthe other assistance that  it needs, perhaps even executioners andtorturers - I'm not afraid of using those words. And what, gentlemen, isthe purpose of this enormous organisation?  Its purpose is to arrestinnocent people and wage pointless prosecutions against them which, asin my case, lead to no result.  How are we to avoid those in officebecoming deeply corrupt when everything is devoid of meaning?  That isimpossible, not even the highest judge would be able to achieve that forhimself.  That is why policemen try to steal the clothes off the back ofthose they arrest, that is why supervisors break into the homes ofpeople they do not know, that is why innocent people are humiliated infront of crowds rather than being given a proper trial.  The policemenonly talked about the warehouses where they put the property of thosethey arrest, I would like to see these warehouses where the hard wonpossessions of people under arrest is left to decay, if, that is, it'snot stolen by the thieving hands of the warehouse workers."
K. was interrupted by a screeching from the far end of the hall,he shaded his eyes to see that far, as the dull light of day made thesmoke whitish and hard to see through.  It was the washerwoman whom K.
had recognised as a likely source of disturbance as soon as she hadentered.  It was hard to see now whether it was her fault or not.  K.
could only see that a man had pulled her into a corner by the door andwas pressing himself against her.  But it was not her who was screaming,but the man, he had opened his mouth wide and looked up at the ceiling.
A small circle had formed around the two of them, the visitors near himin the gallery seemed delighted that the serious tone K. had introducedinto the gathering had been disturbed in this way.   K.'s first thoughtwas to run over there, and he also thought that everyone would want tobring things back into order there or at least to make the pair leavethe room, but the first row of people in front of him stayed were theywere, no-one moved and no-one let K. through.  On the contrary, theystood in his way, old men held out their arms in front of him and a handfrom somewhere - he did not have the time to turn round - took hold ofhis collar.  K., by this time, had forgotten about the pair, it seemedto him that his freedom was being limited as if his arrest was beingtaken seriously, and, without any thought for what he was doing, hejumped down from the podium.  Now he stood face to face with the crowd.
Had he judged the people properly?  Had he put too much faith in theeffect of his speech?  Had they been putting up a pretence all the timehe had been speaking, and now that he come to the end and to what mustfollow, were they tired of pretending?  What faces they were, all aroundhim!  Dark, little eyes flickered here and there, cheeks drooped downlike on drunken men, their long beards were thin and stiff, if they tookhold of them it was more like they were making their hands into claws,not as if they were taking hold of their own beards.  But underneaththose beards - and this was the real discovery made by K. - there werebadges of various sizes and colours shining on the collars of theircoats.  As far as he could see, every one of them was wearing one ofthese badges.  All of them belonged to the same group, even though theyseemed to be divided to the right and the left of him, and when hesuddenly turned round he saw the same badge on the collar of theexamining judge who calmly looked down at him with his hands in his lap.
"So," called out K, throwing his arms in the air as if this suddenrealisation needed more room, "all of you are working for thisorganisation, I see now that you are all the very bunch of cheats andliars I've just been speaking about, you've all pressed yourselves inhere in order to listen in and snoop on me, you gave the impression ofhaving formed into factions, one of you even applauded me to test meout, and you wanted to learn how to trap an innocent man!   Well, I hopeyou haven't come here for nothing, I hope you've either had some funfrom someone who expected you to defend his innocence or else - let goof me or I'll hit you," shouted K. to a quivery old man who had pressedhimself especially close to him - "or else that you've actually learnedsomething.  And so I wish you good luck in your trade."  He briskly tookhis hat from where it lay on the edge of the table and, surrounded by asilence caused perhaps by the completeness of their surprise, pushed hisway to the exit.  However, the examining judge seems to have moved evenmore quickly than K., as he was waiting for him at the doorway.  "Onemoment," he said.  K. stood where he was, but looked at the door withhis hand already on its handle rather than at the judge.  "I merelywanted to draw your attention," said the judge, "to something you seemnot yet to be aware of: today, you have robbed yourself of theadvantages that a hearing of this sort always gives to someone who isunder arrest."  K. laughed towards the door.  "You bunch of louts," hecalled, "you can keep all your hearings as a present from me," thenopened the door and hurried down the steps.  Behind him, the noise ofthe assembly rose as it became lively once more and probably began todiscuss these events as if making a scientific study of them.




Chapter ThreeIn the empty Courtroom - The Student - The Offices
Every day over the following week, K. expected another summons toarrive, he could not believe that his rejection of any more hearings hadbeen taken literally, and when the expected summons really had not comeby Saturday evening he took it to mean that he was expected, withoutbeing told, to appear at the same place at the same time.  So on Sunday,he set out once more in the same direction, going without hesitation upthe steps and through the corridors; some of the people remembered himand greeted him from their doorways, but he no longer needed to askanyone the way and soon arrived at the right door.  It was opened assoon as he knocked and, paying no attention to the woman he had seenlast time who was standing at the doorway, he was about to go straightinto the adjoining room when she said to him "There's no session today".
"What do you mean; no session?" he asked, unable to believe it.  But thewoman persuaded him by opening the door to the next room.  It was indeedempty, and looked even more dismal empty than it had the previousSunday.  On the podium stood the table exactly as it had been beforewith a few books laying on it.  "Can I have a look at those books?"asked K., not because he was especially curious but so that he would nothave come for nothing.  "No," said the woman as she re-closed the door,"that's not allowed.  Those books belong to the examining judge."  "Isee," said K., and nodded, "those books must be law books, and that'show this court does things, not only to try people who are innocent buteven to try them without letting them know what's going on."  "I expectyou're right," said the woman, who had not understood exactly what hemeant.  "I'd better go away again, then," said K.
"Should I give a message to the examining judge?" asked the woman.  "Doyou know him, then?" asked K.  "Of course I know him," said the woman,"my husband is the court usher."  It was only now that K. noticed thatthe room, which before had held nothing but a wash-tub, had been fittedout as a living room.  The woman saw how surprised he was and said,"Yes, we're allowed to live here as we like, only we have to clear theroom out when the court's in session.  There's lots of disadvantages tomy husband's job."  "It's not so much the room that surprises me," saidK., looking at her crossly, "it's your being married that shocks me.""Are you thinking about what happened last time the court was insession, when I disturbed what you were saying?" asked the woman.  "Ofcourse," said K., "it's in the past now and I've nearly forgotten aboutit, but at the time it made me furious.  And now you tell me yourselfthat you are a married woman."  "It wasn't any disadvantage for you tohave your speech interrupted.  The way they talked about you after you'dgone was really bad."  "That could well be," said K., turning away, "butit does not excuse you."  "There's no-one I know who'd hold it againstme," said the woman. "Him, who put his arms around me, he's been chasingafter me for a long time.  I might not be very attractive for mostpeople, but I am for him.  I've got no protection from him, even myhusband has had to get used to it; if he wants to keep his job he's gotto put up with it as that man's a student and he'll almost certainly bevery powerful later on.  He's always after me, he'd only just left whenyou arrived."  "That fits in with everything else," said K., "I'm notsurprised."  "Do you want to make things a bit better here?" the womanasked slowly, watching him as if she were saying something that could beas dangerous for K. as for herself.  "That's what I thought when I heardyou speak, I really liked what you said.  Mind you, I only heard part ofit, I missed the beginning of it and at the end I was lying on the floorwith the student - it's so horrible here," she said after a pause, andtook hold of K.'s hand.  "Do you believe you really will be able to makethings better?"  K. smiled and twisted his hand round a little in hersoft hands.  "It's really not my job to make things better here, as youput it," he said, "and if you said that to the examining judge he wouldlaugh at you or punish you for it.  I really would not have becomeinvolved in this matter if I could have helped it, and I would have lostno sleep worrying about how this court needs to be made better.  Butbecause I'm told that I have been arrested - and I am under arrest - itforces me to take some action, and to do so for my own sake.  However,if I can be of some service to you in the process I will, of course, beglad to do so.  And I will be glad to do so not only for the sake ofcharity but also because you can be of some help to me."  "How could Ihelp you, then?" said the woman.  "You could, for example, show me thebooks on the table there."  "Yes, certainly," the woman cried, andpulled K. along behind her as she rushed to them.  The books were oldand well worn, the cover of one of them had nearly broken through in itsmiddle, and it was held together with a few threads.  "Everything is sodirty here," said K., shaking his head, and before he could pick thebooks up the woman wiped some of the dust off with her apron.  K. tookhold of the book that lay on top and threw it open, an indecent pictureappeared.  A man and a woman sat naked on a sofa, the base intent ofwhoever drew it was easy to see but he had been so grossly lacking inskill that all that anyone could really make out were the man and thewoman who dominated the picture with their bodies, sitting in overlyupright postures that created a false perspective and made it difficultfor them to approach each other.  K. didn't thumb through that book anymore, but just threw open the next one at its title page, it was a novelwith the title, What Grete Suffered from her Husband, Hans.  "So this isthe sort of law book they study here," said K., "this is the sort ofperson sitting in judgement over me."  "I can help you," said the woman,"would you like me to?"  "Could you really do that without placingyourself in danger?  You did say earlier on that your husband is whollydependent on his superiors."  "I still want to help you," said thewoman, "come over here, we've got to talk about it.  Don't say any moreabout what danger I'm in, I only fear danger where I want to fear it.
Come over here."  She pointed to the podium and invited him to sit downon the step with her.  "You've got lovely dark eyes," she said afterthey had sat down, looking up into K.'s face, "people say I've got niceeyes too, but yours are much nicer.  It was the first thing I noticedwhen you first came here.  That's even why I came in here, into theassembly room, afterwards, I'd never normally do that, I'm not reallyeven allowed to."  So that's what all this is about, thought K., she'soffering herself to me, she's as degenerate as everything else aroundhere, she's had enough of the court officials, which is understandable Isuppose, and so she approaches any stranger and makes compliments abouthis eyes.  With that, K. stood up in silence as if he had spoken histhoughts out loud and thus explained his action to the woman.  "I don'tthink you can be of any assistance to me," he said, "to be of any realassistance you would need to be in contact with high officials.  But I'msure you only know the lower employees, and there are crowds of themmilling about here.  I'm sure you're very familiar with them and couldachieve a great deal through them, I've no doubt of that, but the mostthat could be done through them would have no bearing at all on thefinal outcome of the trial.  You, on the other hand, would lose some ofyour friends as a result, and I have no wish of that.  Carry on withthese people in the same way as you have been, as it does seem to me tobe something you cannot do without.  I have no regrets in saying thisas, in return for your compliment to me, I also find you ratherattractive, especially when you look at me as sadly as you are now,although you really have no reason to do so.  You belong to the people Ihave to combat, and you're very comfortable among them, you're even inlove with the student, or if you don't love him you do at least preferhim to your husband.  It's easy to see that from what you've beensaying."  "No!" she shouted, remained sitting where she was and graspedK.'s hand, which he failed to pull away fast enough.  "You can't go awaynow, you can't go away when you've misjudged me like that!  Are youreally capable of going away now?  Am I really so worthless that youwon't even do me the favour of staying a little bit longer?"  "Youmisunderstand me," said K., sitting back down, "if it's really importantto you for me to stay here then I'll be glad to do so, I have plenty oftime, I came here thinking there would be a trial taking place.  All Imeant with what I said just now was to ask you not to do anything on mybehalf in the proceedings against me.  But even that is nothing for youto worry about when you consider that there's nothing hanging on theoutcome of this trial, and that, whatever the verdict, I will just laughat it.  And that's even presupposing it ever even reaches anyconclusion, which I very much doubt.  I think it's much more likely thatthe court officials will be too lazy, too forgetful, or even to fearfulever to continue with these proceedings and that they will soon beabandoned if they haven't been abandoned already.  It's even possiblethat they will pretend to be carrying on with the trial in the hope ofreceiving a large bribe, although I can tell you now that that will bequite in vain as I pay bribes to no-one.  Perhaps one favour you coulddo me would be to tell the examining judge, or anyone else who likes tospread important news, that I will never be induced to pay any sort ofbribe through any stratagem of theirs - and I'm sure they have manystratagems at their disposal.  There is no prospect of that, you cantell them that quite openly.  And what's more, I expect they havealready noticed themselves, or even if they haven't, this affair isreally not so important to me as they think.  Those gentlemen would onlysave some work for themselves, or at least some unpleasantness for me,which, however, I am glad to endure if I know that each piece ofunpleasantness for me is a blow against them.  And I will make quitesure it is a blow against them.  Do you actually know the judge?""Course I do," said the woman, "he was the first one I thought of when Ioffered to help you.  I didn't know he's only a minor official, but ifyou say so it must be true.  Mind you, I still think the report he givesto his superiors must have some influence.  And he writes so manyreports.  You say these officials are lazy, but they're certainly notall lazy, especially this examining judge, he writes ever such a lot.
Last Sunday, for instance, that session went on till the evening.
Everyone had gone, but the examining judge, he stayed in the hall, I hadto bring him a lamp in, all I had was a little kitchen lamp but he wasvery satisfied with it and started to write straight away.  Meantime myhusband arrived, he always has the day off on Sundays, we got thefurniture back in and got our room sorted out and then a few of theneighbours came, we sat and talked for a bit by a candle, in short, weforgot all about the examining judge and went to bed.  All of a suddenin the night, it must have been quite late in the night, I wakes up,next to the bed, there's the examining judge shading the lamp with hishand so that there's no light from it falls on my husband, he didn'tneed to be as careful as that, the way my husband sleeps the lightwouldn't have woken him up anyway.  I was quite shocked and nearlyscreamed, but the judge was very friendly, warned me I should becareful, he whispered to me he's been writing all this time, and nowhe's brought me the lamp back, and he'll never forget how I looked whenhe found me there asleep.  What I mean, with all this, I just wanted totell you how the examining judge really does write lots of reports,especially about you as questioning you was definitely one of the mainthings on the agenda that Sunday.   If he writes reports as long as thatthey must be of some importance.   And besides all that, you can seefrom what happened that the examining judge is after me, and it's rightnow, when he's first begun to notice me, that I can have a lot ofinfluence on him.  And I've got other proof I mean a lot to him, too.
Yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he really trusts and whohe works with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings.  Hesaid it was because I clear up in the courtroom but that's only apretence, that job's no more than what I'm supposed to do, it's what myhusband gets paid for.  Nice stockings, they are, look," - she stretchedout her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at thestocking - "they are nice stockings, but they're too good for me,really."
She suddenly interrupted herself and lay her hand on K.'s as ifshe wanted to calm him down, and whispered, "Be quiet, Berthold iswatching us."  K. slowly looked up.  In the doorway to the courtroomstood a young man, he was short, his legs were not quite straight, andhe continually moved his finger round in a short, thin, red beard withwhich he hoped to make himself look dignified.  K. looked at him withsome curiosity, he was the first student he had ever met of theunfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man whowould even most likely attain high office one day.  The student, incontrast, seemed to take no notice of K. at all, he merely withdrew hisfinger from his beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went overto the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "Don't be crosswith me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, I've gotto go to him now, to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs.  ButI'll come straight back and then I'll go with you if you'll take me,I'll go wherever you want, you can do whatever you like with me, I'll behappy if I can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be bestif I could get away from here for good."  She stroked K.'s hand oncemore, jumped up and ran over to the window.  Before he realised it, K.
grasped for her hand but failed to catch it.   He really was attractedto the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no goodreason why he should not give in to her allure.  It briefly crossed hismind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but thatwas an objection he had no difficulty in fending off.  In what way couldshe entrap him?  Was he not still free, so free that he could crush theentire court whenever he wanted, as least where it concerned him?  Couldhe not have that much confidence in himself?  And her offer of helpsounded sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite worthless.  And maybe therewas no better revenge against the examining judge and his cronies thanto take this woman from him and have her for himself.  Maybe then, aftermuch hard work writing dishonest reports about K., the judge would go tothe woman's bed late one night and find it empty.  And it would be emptybecause she belonged to K., because this woman at the window, this lush,supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy materialbelonged to him, totally to him and to him alone.  Once he had settledhis thoughts towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quietconversation at the window was taking too long, he rapped on the podiumwith his knuckles, and then even with his fist.  The student brieflylooked away from the woman to glance at K. over his shoulder but didallow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close tothe woman and put his arms around her.  She dropped her head down low asif listening to him carefully, as she did so he kissed her right on theneck, hardly even interrupting what he was saying.   K. saw this asconfirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and whichshe had already complained about, he stood up and walked up and down theroom.  Glancing sideways at the student, he wondered what would be thequickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was not unwelcome tohim when the student, clearly disturbed by K.'s to-ing and fro-ing whichK. had now developed into a stamping up and down, said to him,"You don't have to stay here, you know, if you're getting impatient.
You could have gone earlier, no-one would have missed you.  In fact youshould have gone, you should have left as quickly as possible as soon asI got here."  This comment could have caused all possible rage to breakout between them, but K. also bore in mind that this was a prospectivecourt official speaking to a disfavoured defendant, and he might wellhave been taking pride in speaking in this way.  K. remained standingquite close to him and said with a smile, "You're quite right, I amimpatient, but the easiest way to settle this impatience would be if youleft us.  On the other hand, if you've come here to study - you are astudent, I hear - I'll be quite happy to leave the room to you and goaway with the woman.  I'm sure you'll still have a lot of study to dobefore you're made into a judge.  It's true that I'm still not all thatfamiliar with your branch of jurisprudence but I take it it involves alot more than speaking roughly - and I see you have no shame in doingthat extremely well."  "He shouldn't have been allowed to move about sofreely," said the student, as if he wanted to give the woman anexplanation for K.'s insults, "that was a mistake.  I've told theexamining judge so.  He should at least have been detained in his roombetween hearings.  Sometimes it's impossible to understand what thejudge thinks he's doing.""You're wasting your breath," said K., then he reached his hand outtowards the woman and said, "come with me."  "So that's it," said thestudent, "oh no, you're not going to get her," and with a strength youwould not have expected from him, he glanced tenderly at her, lifted herup on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to thedoor.  In this way he showed, unmistakeably, that he was to some extentafraid of K., but he nonetheless dared to provoke him still further bystroking and squeezing the woman's arm with his free hand.  K. ran thefew steps up to him, but when he had reached him and was about to takehold of him and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said, "It's nogood, it's the examining judge who's sent for me, I daren't go with you,this little bastard..." and here she ran her hand over the student'sface, "this little bastard won't let me."  "And you don't want to be setfree!" shouted K., laying his hand on the student's shoulder, who thensnapped at it with his teeth.  "No!" shouted the woman, pushing K. awaywith both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you're doing!?That'd be the end of me.  Let go of him, please just let go of him.
He's only carrying out the judge's orders, he's carrying me to him.""Let him take you then, and I want to see nothing more of you," said K.,enraged by his disappointment and giving the student a thump in the backso that he briefly stumbled and then, glad that he had not fallen,immediately jumped up all the higher with his burden.  K. followed themslowly.  He realised that this was the first unambiguous setback he hadsuffered from these people.  It was of course nothing to worry about, heaccepted the setback only because he was looking for a fight.  If hestayed at home and carried on with his normal life he would be athousand times superior to these people and could get any of them out ofhis way just with a kick.  And he imagined the most laughable scenepossible as an example of this, if this contemptible student, thisinflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneeling at Elsa'sbed wringing his hands and begging for forgiveness.  K. so enjoyedimagining this scene that he decided to take the student along to Elsawith him if ever he should get the opportunity.

K. was curious to see where the woman would be taken and hehurried over to the door, the student was not likely to carry herthrough the streets on his arm.  It turned out that the journey was farshorter.  Directly opposite the flat there was a narrow flight of woodensteps which probably led up to the attic, they turned as they went sothat it was not possible to see where they ended.  The student carriedthe woman up these steps, and after the exertions of running with her hewas soon groaning and moving very slowly.  The woman waved down at K.
and by raising and lowering her shoulders she tried to show that she wasan innocent party in this abduction, although the gesture did not show alot of regret.  K. watched her without expression like a stranger, hewanted to show neither that he was disappointed nor that he would easilyget over his disappointment.

The two of them had disappeared, but K. remained standing in thedoorway.  He had to accept that the woman had not only cheated him butthat she had also lied to him when she said she was being taken to theexamining judge.  The examining judge certainly wouldn't be sitting andwaiting in the attic.  The wooden stairs would explain nothing to himhowever long he stared at them.  Then K. noticed a small piece of papernext to them, went across to it and read, in a childish and unpractisedhand, "Entrance to the Court Offices".  Were the court offices here, inthe attic of this tenement, then?  If that was how they wereaccommodated it did not attract much respect, and it was some comfortfor the accused to realise how little money this court had at itsdisposal if it had to locate its offices in a place where the tenants ofthe building, who were themselves among the poorest of people, wouldthrow their unneeded junk.  On the other hand, it was possible that theofficials  had enough money but that they squandered it on themselvesrather than use it for the court's purposes.  Going by K.'s experienceof them so far, that even seemed probable, except that if the court wereallowed to decay in that way it would not just humiliate the accused butalso give him more encouragement than if the court were simply  in astate of poverty.  K. also now understood that the court was ashamed tosummon those it accused to the attic of this building for the initialhearing, and why it preferred to impose upon them in their own homes.
What a position it was that K. found himself in, compared with the judgesitting up in the attic!  K., at the bank, had a big office with anante-room, and had an enormous window through which he could look downat the activity in the square.  It was true, though, that he had nosecondary income from bribes and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servantto bring him a woman up to the office on his arm.  K., however, wasquite willing to do without such things, in this life at least.  K. wasstill looking at the notice when a man came up the stairs, lookedthrough the open door into the living room where it was also possible tosee the courtroom, and finally asked K. whether he had just seen a womanthere.  "You're the court usher, aren't you?" asked K.  "That's right,"said the man, "oh, yes, you're defendant K., I recognise you now aswell.  Nice to see you here."  And he offered K. his hand, which was farfrom what K. had expected.  And when K. said nothing, he added, "There'sno court session planned for today, though."  "I know that," said K. ashe looked at the usher's civilian coat which, beside its ordinarybuttons, displayed two gilded ones as the only sign of his office andseemed to have been taken from an old army officer's coat.  "I wasspeaking with your wife a little while ago.  She is no longer here.  Thestudent has carried her off to the examining judge."  "Listen to this,"said the usher, "they're always carrying her away from me.  It's Sundaytoday, and it's not part of my job to do any work today, but they sendme off with some message which isn't even necessary just to get me awayfrom here.  What they do is they send me off not too far away so that Ican still hope to get back on time if I really hurry.  So off I gorunning as fast as I can, shout the message through the crack in thedoor of the office I've been sent to, so out of breath they'll hardly beable to understand it, run back here again, but the student's been evenfaster than I have - well he's got less far to go, he's only got to rundown the steps.  If I wasn't so dependent on them I'd have squashed thestudent against the wall here a long time ago.  Right here, next to thesign.  I'm always dreaming of doing that.  Just here, just above thefloor, that's where he's crushed onto the wall, his arms stretched out,his fingers spread apart, his crooked legs twisted round into a circleand blood squirted out all around him.  It's only ever been a dream sofar, though."  "Is there nothing else you do?" asked K. with a smile.
"Nothing that I know of," said the usher.  "And it's going to get evenworse now, up till now he's only been carrying her off for himself, nowhe's started carrying her off for the judge and all, just like I'dalways said he would."  "Does your wife, then, not share some of theresponsibility?" asked K.  He had to force himself as he asked thisquestion, as he, too, felt so jealous now.  "Course she does," said theusher, "it's more her fault than theirs.  It was her who attachedherself to him.  All he did, he just chases after any woman.  There'sfive flats in this block alone where he's been thrown out after workinghis way in there.  And my wife is the best looking woman in the wholebuilding, but it's me who's not even allowed to defend himself."  "Ifthat's how things are, then there's nothing that can be done," said K.
"Well why not?" asked the usher.  "He's a coward that student, if hewants to lay a finger on my wife all you'd have to do is give him such agood hiding he'd never dare do it again.  But I'm not allowed to dothat, and nobody else is going to do me the favour as they're all afraidof his power.  The only one who could do it is a man like you."  "What,how could I do it?" asked K. in astonishment.
"Well you're facing a charge, aren't you," said the usher.  "Yes, butthat's all the more reason for me to be afraid.  Even if he has noinfluence on the outcome of the trial he probably has some on theinitial examination."  "Yes, exactly," said the usher, as if K.'s viewhad been just as correct as his own.  "Only we don't usually get anytrials heard here with no hope at all."  "I am not of the same opinion",said K., "although that ought not to prevent me from dealing with thestudent if the opportunity arises."  "I would be very grateful to you,"said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not really seeming tobelieve that his highest wish could be fulfilled.  "Perhaps," continuedK., "perhaps there are some other officials of yours here, perhaps allof them, who would deserve the same."  "Oh yes, yes," said the usher, asif this was a matter of course.  Then he looked at K. trustingly which,despite all his friendliness, he had not done until then, and added,"they're always rebelling."  But the conversation seemed to have becomea little uncomfortable for him, as he broke it off by saying, "now Ihave to report to the office.  Would you like to come with me?""There's nothing for me to do there," said K.
"You'd be able to have a look at it.  No-one will take any notice ofyou."  "Is it worth seeing then?" asked K. hesitatingly, although hefelt very keen to go with him.  "Well," said the usher, "I thought you'dbe interested in it."  "Alright then," said K. finally, "I'll come withyou."  And, quicker than the usher himself, he ran up the steps.

At the entrance he nearly fell over, as behind the door there wasanother step. "They don't show much concern for the public," he said.
"They don't show any concern at all," said the usher, "just look at thewaiting room here."  It consisted of a long corridor from which roughlymade doors led out to the separate departments of the attic.  There wasno direct source of light but it was not entirely dark as many of thedepartments, instead of solid walls, had just wooden bars reaching up tothe ceiling to separate them from the corridor.  The light made its wayin through them, and it was also possible to see individual officialsthrough them as they sat writing at their desks or stood up at thewooden frameworks and watched the people on the corridor through thegaps.  There were only a few people in the corridor, probably because itwas Sunday.  They were not very impressive.  They sat, equally spaced,on two rows of long wooden benches which had been placed along bothsides of the corridor.  All of them were carelessly dressed although theexpressions on their faces, their bearing, the style of their beards andmany details which were hard to identify showed that they belonged tothe upper classes.  There were no coat hooks for them to use, and sothey had placed their hats under the bench, each probably havingfollowed the example of the others.  When those who were sitting nearestthe door saw K. and the usher of the court they stood up to greet them,and when the others saw that, they also thought they had to greet them,so that as the two of them went by all the people there stood up.  Noneof them stood properly upright, their backs were bowed, their kneesbent, they stood like beggars on the street.  K. waited for the usher,who was following just behind him.  "They must all be very dispirited,"he said.  "Yes," said the usher, "they are the accused, everyone you seehere has been accused."  "Really!" said K.  "They're colleagues of minethen."  And he turned to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hairthat was nearly grey.  "What is it you are waiting for here?" asked K.,politely, but the man was startled at being spoken to unexpectedly,which was all the more pitiful to see because the man clearly had someexperience of the world and elsewhere would certainly have been able toshow his superiority and would not have easily given up the advantage hehad acquired.  Here, though, he did not know what answer to give to sucha simple question and looked round at the others as if they were undersome obligation to help him, and as if no-one could expect any answerfrom him without this help.  Then the usher of the court stepped forwardto him and, in order to calm him down and raise his spirits, said, "Thegentleman here's only asking what it is you're waiting for.  You cangive him an answer."  The voice of the usher was probably familiar tohim, and had a better effect than K.'s.  "I'm ... I'm waiting ..." hebegan, and then came to a halt.  He had clearly chosen this beginning sothat he could give a precise answer to the question, but now he didn'tknow how to continue.  Some of the others waiting had come closer andstood round the group, the usher of the court said to them, "Get out theway, keep the gangway free."  They moved back slightly, but not as faras where they had been sitting before.  In the meantime, the man whom K.
had first approached had pulled himself together and even answered himwith a smile.
"A month ago I made some applications for evidence to be heard in mycase, and I'm waiting for it to be settled."  "You certainly seem to begoing to a lot of effort," said K.  "Yes," said the man, "it is myaffair after all."  "Not everyone thinks the same way as you do," saidK. "I've been indicted as well but I swear on my soul that I've neithersubmitted evidence nor done anything else of the sort.  Do you reallythink that's necessary?"  "I don't really know, exactly," said the man,once more totally unsure of himself; he clearly thought K. was jokingwith him and therefore probably thought it best to repeat his earlieranswer in order to avoid making any new mistakes.  With K. looking athim impatiently, he just said, "as far as I'm concerned, I've applied tohave this evidence heard."  "Perhaps you don't believe I've beenindicted?" asked K.  "Oh, please, I certainly do," said the man,stepping slightly to one side, but there was more anxiety in his answerthan belief.  "You don't believe me then?" asked K., and took hold ofhis arm, unconsciously prompted by the man's humble demeanour, and as ifhe wanted to force him to believe him.  But he did not want to hurt theman and had only taken hold of him very lightly.  Nonetheless, the mancried out as if K. had grasped him not with two fingers but with red hottongs.  Shouting in this ridiculous way finally made K. tired of him, ifhe didn't believe he was indicted then so much the better; maybe he eventhought K. was a judge.  And before leaving, he held him a lot harder,shoved him back onto the bench and walked on.  "These defendants are sosensitive, most of them," said the usher of the court.  Almost all ofthose who had been waiting had now assembled around the man who, by now,had stopped shouting and they seemed to be asking him lots of precisequestions about the incident.  K. was approached by a security guard,identifiable mainly by his sword, of which the scabbard seemed to bemade of aluminium.  This greatly surprised K., and he reached out for itwith his hand.  The guard had come because of the shouting and askedwhat had been happening.  The usher of the court said a few words to tryand calm him down but the guard explained that he had to look into ithimself, saluted, and hurried on, walking with very short steps,probably because of gout.

K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people,especially as he saw a turning off the corridor, about half way along iton the right hand side, where there was no door to stop him going thatway.  He asked the usher whether that was the right way to go, the ushernodded, and that is the way that K. went.  The usher remained always oneor two steps behind K, which he found irritating as in a place like thisit could give the impression that he was being driven along by someonewho had arrested him, so he frequently waited for the usher to catch up,but the usher always remained behind him.  In order to put an end to hisdiscomfort, K. finally said, "Now that I've seen what it looks likehere, I'd like to go."  "You haven't seen everything yet," said theusher ingenuously.
"I don't want to see everything," said K., who was also feeling verytired, "I want to go, what is the way to the exit?"  "You haven't gotlost, have you?" asked the usher in amazement, "you go down this way tothe corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as thedoor."  "Come with me," said K., "show me the way, I'll miss it, thereare so many different ways here."  "It's the only way there is," saidthe usher, who had now started to sound quite reproachful, "I can't goback with you again, I've got to hand in my report, and I've alreadylost a lot of time because of you as it is."  "Come with me!" K.
repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught the usher outin a lie.  "Don't shout like that," whispered the usher, "there'soffices all round us here.  If you don't want to go back by yourselfcome on a bit further with me or else wait here till I've sorted out myreport, then I'll be glad to go back with you again."  "No, no," saidK., "I will not wait and you must come with me now."  K. had still notlooked round at anything at all in the room where he found himself, andit was only when one of the many wooden doors all around him opened thathe noticed it.  A young woman, probably summoned by the loudness of K.'svoice, entered and asked, "What is it the gentleman wants?"  In thedarkness behind her there was also a man approaching.  K. looked at theusher.  He had, after all, said that no-one would take any notice of K.,and now there were two people coming, it only needed a few and everyonein the office would become aware of him and asking for explanations asto why he was there.  The only understandable and acceptable thing tosay was that he was accused of something and wanted to know the date ofhis next hearing, but this was an explanation he did not want to give,especially as it was not true - he had only come out of curiosity.  Orelse, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he wanted toascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on theoutside.  And it did seem that he had been quite right in thissupposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was disturbedenough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame ofmind just then to face a high official such as might appear from behindany door, and he wanted to go, either with the usher of the court or, ifneeds be, alone.

But he must have seemed very odd standing there in silence, andthe young woman and the usher were indeed looking at him as if theythought he would go through some major metamorphosis any second whichthey didn't want to miss seeing.  And in the doorway stood the man whomK. had noticed in the background earlier, he held firmly on to the beamabove the low door swinging a little on the tips of his feet as ifbecoming impatient as he watched.  But the young woman was the first torecognise that K.'s behaviour was caused by his feeling slightly unwell,she brought a chair and asked,"Would you not like to sit down?"  K. sat down immediately and, in orderto keep his place better, put his elbows on the armrests.  "You're alittle bit dizzy, aren't you?" she asked him.  Her face was now close infront of him, it bore the severe expression that many young women havejust when they're in the bloom of their youth.  "It's nothing for you toworry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost everyonegets an attack like that the first time they come here.  This is yourfirst time is it?  Yes, it's nothing unusual then.  The sun burns downon the roof and the hot wood makes the air so thick and heavy.  It makesthis place rather unsuitable for offices, whatever other advantages itmight offer.  But the air is almost impossible to breathe on days whenthere's a lot of business, and that's almost every day.  And when youthink that there's a lot of washing put out to dry here as well - and wecan't stop the tenants doing that - it's not surprising you started tofeel unwell.  But you get used to the air alright in the end.  Whenyou're here for the second or third time you'll hardly notice howoppressive the air is.  Are you feeling any better now?"  K. made noanswer, he felt too embarrassed at being put at the mercy of thesepeople by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling illmade him feel not better but a little worse.  The girl noticed itstraight away, and to make the air fresher for K., she took a windowpole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatchdirectly above K.'s head that led to the outside.  But so much soot fellin that the girl had to immediately close the hatch again and clean thesoot off K.'s hands with her handkerchief, as K. was too tired to dothat for himself.  He would have liked just to sit quietly where he wasuntil he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people madeabout him the sooner that would be.  But then the girl said, "You can'tstay here, we're in people's way here ..."  K. looked at her as if toask whose way they were impeding.  "If you like, I can take you to thesick room," and turning to the man in the doorway said, "please helpme".  The man immediately came over to them, but K. did not want to goto the sick room, that was just what he wanted to avoid, being ledfurther from place to place, the further he went the more difficult itmust become.  So he said, "I am able to walk now," and stood up, shakingafter becoming used to sitting so comfortably.  But then he was unableto stay upright. "I can't manage it," he said shaking his head, and satdown again with a sigh.  He remembered the usher who, despiteeverything, would have been able to lead him out of there but who seemedto have gone long before.  K. looked out between the man and the youngwoman who were standing in front of him but was unable to find theusher.  "I think," said the man, who was elegantly dressed and whoseappearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that hadtwo long, sharply tailored points, "the gentleman is feeling unwellbecause of the atmosphere here, so the best thing, and what he wouldmost prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him outof the offices altogether."  "That's right," exclaimed K., with such joythat he nearly interrupted what the man was saying, "I'm sure that'llmake me feel better straight away, I'm really not that weak, all I needis a little support under my arms, I won't cause you much trouble, it'snot such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then I'll sit on thestairs for a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attacks likethis at all, I'm surprised at it myself.  I also work in an office andI'm quite used to office air, but here it seems to be too strong, you'vesaid so yourselves.  So please, be so kind as to help me on my way alittle, I'm feeling dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if I stand upby myself."  And with that he raised his shoulders to make it easier forthe two of them to take him by the arms.

The man, however, didn't follow this suggestion but just stoodthere with his hands in his trouser pockets and laughed out loud.
"There, you see," he said to the girl, "I was quite right.  Thegentleman is only unwell here, and not in general."  The young womansmiled too, but lightly tapped the man's arm with the tips of herfingers as if he had allowed himself too much fun with K.  "So what doyou think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "I really do want tolead the gentleman out of here."  "That's alright, then," said the girl,briefly inclining her charming head.  "Don't worry too much about himlaughing," said the girl to K., who had become unhappy once more andstared quietly in front of himself as if needing no further explanation.
"This gentleman - may I introduce you?" - (the man gave his permissionwith a wave of the hand) - "so, this gentleman's job is to give outinformation.  He gives all the information they need to people who arewaiting, as our court and its offices are not very well known among thepublic he gets asked for quite a lot.  He has an answer for everyquestion, you can try him out if you feel like it.  But that's not hisonly distinction, his other distinction is his elegance of dress.  We,that's to say all of us who work in the offices here, we decided thatthe information-giver would have to be elegantly dressed as hecontinually has to deal with the litigants and he's the first one theymeet, so he needs to give a dignified first impression.  The rest of usI'm afraid, as you can see just by looking at me, dress very badly andold-fashioned; and there's not much point in spending much on clothesanyway, as we hardly ever leave the offices, we even sleep here.  But,as I said, we decided that the information-giver would have to have niceclothes.  As the management here is rather peculiar in this respect, andthey would get them for us, we had a collection - some of the litigantscontributed too - and bought him these lovely clothes and some othersbesides.  So everything would be ready for him to give a goodimpression, except that he spoils it again by laughing and frighteningpeople."  "That's how it is," said the man, mocking her, "but I don'tunderstand why it is that you're explaining all our intimate facts tothe gentleman, or rather why it is that you're pressing them on him, asI'm sure he's not all interested.  Just look at him sitting there, it'sclear he's occupied with his own affairs."  K. just did not feel likecontradicting him.. The girl's intention may have been good, perhaps shewas under instructions to distract him or to give him the chance tocollect himself, but the attempt had not worked.  "I had to explain tohim why you were laughing," said the girl.  "I suppose it wasinsulting."  "I think he would forgive even worse insults if I finallytook him outside."  K. said nothing, did not even look up, he toleratedthe two of them negotiating over him like an object, that was even whatsuited him best.  But suddenly he felt the information-giver's hand onone arm and the young woman's hand on the other.  "Up you get then,weakling," said the information-giver.  "Thank you both very much," saidK., pleasantly surprised, as he slowly rose and personally guided theseunfamiliar hands to the places where he most needed support.
As they approached the corridor, the girl said quietly into K.'s ear, "Imust seem to think it's very important to show the information-giver ina good light, but you shouldn't doubt what I say, I just want to say thetruth.  He isn't hard-hearted.  It's not really his job to helplitigants outside if they're unwell but he's doing it anyway, as you cansee.  I don't suppose any of us is hard-hearted, perhaps we'd all liketo be helpful, but working for the court offices it's easy for us togive the impression we are hard-hearted and don't want to help anyone.
It makes me quite sad."  "Would you not like to sit down here a while?"asked the information-giver, there were already in the corridor and justin front of the defendant whom K. had spoken to earlier.  K. felt almostashamed to be seen by him, earlier he had stood so upright in front ofhim and now he had to be supported by two others, his hat was held up bythe information-giver balanced on outstretched fingers, his hair wasdishevelled and hung down onto the sweat on his forehead.  But thedefendant seemed to notice nothing of what was going on and just stoodthere humbly, as if wanting to apologise to the information-giver forbeing there. The information-giver looked past him.  "I know," he said,"that my case can't be settled today, not yet, but I've come in anyway,I thought, I thought I could wait here anyway, it's Sunday today, I'vegot plenty of time, and I'm not disturbing anyone here."  "There's noneed to be so apologetic," said the information-giver, "it's verycommendable for you to be so attentive.  You are taking up space herewhen you don't need to but as long as you don't get in my way I will donothing to stop you following the progress of your case as closely asyou like.  When one has seen so many people who shamefully neglect theircases one learns to show patience with people like you.   Do sit down.""He's very good with the litigants," whispered the girl.  K. nodded, butstarted to move off again when the information-giver repeated, "Wouldyou not like to sit down here a while?"  "No," said K., "I don't want torest."  He had said that as decisively as he could, but in fact itwould have done him a lot of good to sit down.  It was as if he weresuffering sea-sickness.  He felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea,as if the water were hitting against the wooden walls, a thundering fromthe depths of the corridor as if the torrent were crashing over it, asif the corridor were swaying and the waiting litigants on each side ofit rising and sinking.  It made the calmness of the girl and the manleading him all the more incomprehensible.  He was at their mercy, ifthey let go of him he would fall like a board.  Their little eyesglanced here and there, K. could feel the evenness of their steps butcould not do the same, as from step to step he was virtually beingcarried.  He finally noticed they were speaking to him but he did notunderstand them, all he heard was a noise that filled all the space andthrough which there seemed to be an unchanging higher note sounding,like a siren.  "Louder," he whispered with his head sunk low, ashamed athaving to ask them to speak louder when he knew they had spoken loudlyenough, even if it had been, for him, incomprehensible.  At last, adraught of cool air blew in his face as if a gap had been torn out inthe wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someone say, "Firsthe says he wants to go, and then you can tell him a hundred times thatthis is the way out and he doesn't move."  K. became aware that he wasstanding in front of the way out, and that the young woman had openedthe door.  It seemed to him that all his strength returned to him atonce, and to get a foretaste of freedom he stepped straight on to one ofthe stairs and took his leave there of his companions, who bowed to him.
"Thank you very much," he repeated, shook their hands once more and didnot let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear thecomparatively fresh air from the stairway after being so long used tothe air in the offices.  They were hardly able to reply, and the youngwoman might even have fallen over if K. had not shut the door extremelyfast.  K. then stood still for a while, combed his hair with the help ofa pocket mirror, picked up his hat from the next stair - theinformation-giver must have thrown it down there - and then he ran downthe steps so fresh and in such long leaps that the contrast with hisprevious state nearly frightened him.  His normally sturdy state ofhealth had never prepared him for surprises such as this.  Did his bodywant to revolt and cause him a new trial as he was bearing the old onewith such little effort?  He did not quite reject the idea that heshould see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatever he did- and this was something on which he could advise himself - he wanted tospend all Sunday mornings in future better than he had spent this one.




Chapter FourMiss Bürstner's Friend
For some time after this, K. found it impossible to exchange evenjust a few words with Miss Bürstner.  He tried to reach her in many andvarious ways but she always found a way to avoid it.  He would comestraight home from the office, remain in her room without the light on,and sit on the sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watchon the empty hallway.  If the maid went by and closed the door of theapparently empty room he would get up after a while and open it again.
He got up an hour earlier than usual in the morning so that he mightperhaps find Miss Bürstner alone as she went to the office.  But none ofthese efforts brought any success.  Then he wrote her a letter, both tothe office and the flat, attempting once more to justify his behaviour,offered to make whatever amends he could, promised never to crosswhatever boundary she might set him and begged merely to have the chanceto speak to her some time, especially as he was unable to do anythingwith Mrs. Grubach either until he had spoken with Miss Bürstner, hefinally informed her that the following Sunday he would stay in his roomall day waiting for a sign from her that there was some hope of hisrequest being fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him whyshe could not fulfil it even though he had promised to observe whateverstipulations she might make.  The letters were not returned, but therewas no answer either.  However, on the following Sunday there was a signthat seemed clear enough.  It was still early when K. noticed, throughthe keyhole, that there was an unusual level of activity in the hallwaywhich soon abated.  A French teacher, although she was German and calledMontag, a pale and febrile girl with a slight limp who had previouslyoccupied a room of her own, was moving into Miss Bürstner's room.  Shecould be seen shuffling through the hallway for several hours, there wasalways another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she hadforgotten and had to be fetched specially and brought into the new home.

When Mrs. Grubach brought K. his breakfast - ever since the timewhen she had made K. so cross she didn't trust the maid to do theslightest job - he had no choice but to speak to her, for the first timein five days.  "Why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" heasked as she poured his coffee out, "Can't something be done about it?Does this clearing out have to be done on a Sunday?"  K. did not look upat Mrs. Grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she seemed to feel somerelief as she breathed in.  Even sharp questions like this from Mr. K.
she perceived as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness.
"We're not clearing anything out, Mr. K.," she said, "it's just thatMiss Montag is moving in with Miss Bürstner and is moving her thingsacross."  She said nothing more, but just waited to see how K. wouldtake it and whether he would allow her to carry on speaking.  But K.
kept her in uncertainty, took the spoon and pensively stirred his coffeewhile he remained silent.  Then he looked up at her and said, "Whatabout the suspicions you had earlier about Miss Bürstner, have you giventhem up?"  "Mr. K.," called Mrs. Grubach, who had been waiting for thisvery question, as she put her hands together and held them out towardshim.  "I just made a chance remark and you took it so badly.  I didn'thave the slightest intention of offending anyone, not you or anyoneelse.  You've known me for long enough, Mr. K., I'm sure you'reconvinced of that.  You don't know how I've been suffering for the pastfew days!  That I should tell lies about my tenants!  And you, Mr. K.,you believed it!  And said I should give you notice!  Give you notice!"At this last outcry, Mrs. Grubach was already choking back her tears,she raised her apron to her face and blubbered out loud.

"Oh, don't cry Mrs. Grubach," said K., looking out the window, hewas thinking only of Miss Bürstner and how she was accepting an unknowngirl into her room.  "Now don't cry," he said again as he turned hislook back into the room where Mrs. Grubach was still crying.  "I meantno harm either when I said that.  It was simply a misunderstandingbetween us.  That can happen even between old friends sometimes."  Mrs.
Grubach pulled her apron down to below her eyes to see whether K. reallywas attempting a reconciliation.  "Well, yes, that's how it is," saidK., and as Mrs. Grubach's behaviour indicated that the captain had saidnothing he dared to add, "Do you really think, then, that I'd want tomake an enemy of you for the sake of a girl we hardly know?" "Yes,you're quite right, Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach, and then, to hermisfortune, as soon as she felt just a little freer to speak, she addedsomething rather inept.  "I kept asking myself why it was that Mr. K.
took such an interest in Miss Bürstner.  Why does he quarrel with meover her when he knows that any cross word from him and I can't sleepthat night?  And I didn't say anything about Miss Bürstner that I hadn'tseen with my own eyes."  K. said nothing in reply, he should have chasedher from the room as soon as she had opened her mouth, and he didn'twant to do that.  He contented himself with merely drinking his coffeeand letting Mrs. Grubach feel that she was superfluous.  Outside, thedragging steps of Miss Montag could still be heard as she went from oneside of the hallway to the other.  "Do you hear that?" asked K. pointinghis hand at the door.  "Yes," said Mrs. Grubach with a sigh, "I wantedto give her some help and I wanted the maid to help her too but she'sstubborn, she wants to move everything in herself.  I wonder at MissBürstner.  I often feel it's a burden for me to have Miss Montag as atenant but Miss Bürstner accepts her into her room with herself.""There's nothing there for you to worry about" said K., crushing theremains of a sugar lump in his cup.  "Does she cause you any trouble?""No," said Mrs. Grubach, "in itself it's very good to have her there, itmakes another room free for me and I can let my nephew, the captain,occupy it.  I began to worry he might be disturbing you when I had tolet him live in the living room next to you over the last few days.
He's not very considerate."  "What an idea!" said K. standing up,"there's no question of that.  You seem to think that because I can'tstand this to-ing and fro-ing of Miss Montag that I'm over-sensitive -and there she goes back again."  Mrs. Grubach appeared quite powerless.
"Should I tell her to leave moving the rest of her things over tilllater, then, Mr. K.?  If that's what you want I'll do it immediately.""But she has to move in with Miss Bürstner!" said K.  "Yes," said Mrs.
Grubach, without quite understanding what K. meant.  "So she has to takeher things over there."  Mrs. Grubach just nodded.  K. was irritated allthe more by this dumb helplessness which, seen from the outside, couldhave seemed like a kind of defiance on her part.  He began to walk upand down the room between the window and the door, thus depriving Mrs.
Grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise probably would havedone.

Just as K. once more reached the door, someone knocked at it.  Itwas the maid, to say that Miss Montag would like to have a few wordswith Mr. K., and therefore requested that he come to the dining roomwhere she was waiting for him.  K. heard the maid out thoughtfully, andthen looked back at the shocked Mrs. Grubach in a way that was almostcontemptuous.  His look seemed to be saying that K. had been expectingthis invitation for Miss Montag for a long time, and that it wasconfirmation of the suffering he had been made to endure that Sundaymorning from Mrs. Grubach's tenants.  He sent the maid back with thereply that he was on his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change hiscoat, and in answer to Mrs. Grubach's gentle whining about the nuisanceMiss Montag was causing merely asked her to clear away the breakfastthings.  "But you've hardly touched it," said Mrs. Grubach.  "Oh justtake it away!" shouted K.  It seemed to him that Miss Montag was mixedup in everything and made it repulsive to him.

As he went through the hallway he looked at the closed door ofMiss Bürstner's room.  But it wasn't there that he was invited, but thedining room, to which he yanked the door open without knocking.

The room was long but narrow with one window.  There was onlyenough space available to put two cupboards at an angle in the corner bythe door, and the rest of the room was entirely taken up with the longdining table which started by the door and reached all the way to thegreat window, which was thus made almost inaccessible.  The table wasalready laid for a large number of people, as on Sundays almost all thetenants ate their dinner here at midday.

When K. entered, Miss Montag came towards him from the windowalong one side of the table.  They greeted each other in silence.  ThenMiss Montag, her head unusually erect as always, said, "I'm not surewhether you know me."  K. looked at her with a frown.  "Of course I do,"he said, "you've been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some timenow."  "But I get the impression you don't pay much attention to what'sgoing on in the lodging house,"  said Miss Montag.  "No," said K.
"Would you not like to sit down?" said Miss Montag.  In silence, the twoof them drew chairs out from the farthest end of the table and sat downfacing each other.  But Miss Montag stood straight up again as she hadleft her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffleddown the whole length of the room.  When she came back, the handbaglightly swinging, she said, "I'd like just to have a few words with youon behalf of my friend.  She would have come herself, but she's feelinga little unwell today.  Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her andlisten to me instead.  There's anyway nothing that she could have saidthat I won't.  On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even morethan her because I'm relatively impartial.  Would you not agree?"  "Whatis there to say, then?" answered K., who was tired of Miss Montagcontinuously watching his lips.  In that way she took control of what hewanted to say before he said it.  "Miss Bürstner clearly refuses togrant me the personal meeting that I asked her for."  "That's how itis," said Miss Montag, "or rather, that's not at all how it is, the wayyou put it is remarkably severe.  Generally speaking, meetings areneither granted nor the opposite.  But it can be that meetings areconsidered unnecessary, and that's how it is here.  Now, after yourcomment, I can speak openly.  You asked my friend, verbally or inwriting, for the chance to speak with her.  Now my friend is aware ofyour reasons for asking for this meeting - or at least I suppose she is- and so, for reasons I know nothing about, she is quite sure that itwould be of no benefit to anyone if this meeting actually took place.
Moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made itclear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourselfeither, she feels that it can only have been a matter of chance thatsuch an idea came to you, and that even without any explanations fromher, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have not doneso already, the futility of your idea.  My answer to that is thatalthough it may be quite right, I consider it advantageous, if thematter is to be made perfectly clear, to give you an explicit answer.  Ioffered my services in taking on the task, and after some hesitation myfriend conceded.  I hope, however, also to have acted in your interests,as even the slightest uncertainty in the least significant of matterswill always remain a cause of suffering and if, as in this case, it canbe removed without substantial effort, then it is better if that is donewithout delay."  "I thank you," said K. as soon as Miss Montag hadfinished.  He stood slowly up, looked at her, then across the table,then out the window - the house opposite stood there in the sun - andwent to the door.  Miss Montag followed him a few paces, as if she didnot quite trust him.  At the door, however, both of them had to stepback as it opened and Captain Lanz entered.  This was the first timethat K. had seen him close up.  He was a large man of about forty with atanned, fleshy face.  He bowed slightly, intending it also for K., andthen went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed her hand.  He wasvery elegant in the way he moved. The courtesy he showed towards MissMontag made a striking contrast with the way she had been treated by K.
Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross with K. as it evenseemed to him that she wanted to introduce the captain.  K. however, didnot want to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sortof friendliness either to Miss Montag or to the captain, the kiss on thehand had, for K., bound them into a group which would keep him at adistance from Miss Bürstner whilst at the same time seeming to betotally harmless and unselfish.  K. thought, however, that he saw morethan that, he thought he also saw that Miss Montag had chosen a means ofdoing it that was good, but two-edged.  She exaggerated the importanceof the relationship between K. and Miss Bürstner, and above all sheexaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and she tried atthe same time to make out that K. was exaggerating everything.  Shewould be disappointed, K. did not want to exaggerate anything, he wasaware that Miss Bürstner was a little typist who would not offer himmuch resistance for long.  In doing so he deliberately took no accountof what Mrs. Grubach had told him about Miss Bürstner.  All these thingswere going through his mind as he left the room with hardly a politeword.  He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little laugh fromMiss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought him tothe idea that he might prepare a  surprise for the two of them, thecaptain and Miss Montag.  He looked round and listened to find out ifthere might be any disturbance from any of the surrounding rooms,everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversationfrom the dining room and Mrs. Grubach's voice from the passage leadingto the kitchen.  This seemed an opportune time, K. went to MissBürstner's room and knocked gently.  There was no sound so he knockedagain but there was still no answer in reply.  Was she asleep?  Or wasshe really unwell?  Or was she just pretending as she realised it couldonly be K. knocking so gently?  K. assumed she was pretending andknocked harder, eventually, when the knocking brought no result, hecarefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was notonly improper but also pointless.  In the room there was no-one.  What'smore, it looked hardly at all like the room K. had known before.
Against the wall there were now two beds behind one another, there wereclothes piled up on three chairs near the door, a wardrobe stood open.
Miss Bürstner must have gone out while Miss Montag was speaking to himin the dining room.  K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardlyexpected to be able to find Miss Bürstner so easily and had made thisattempt for little more reason than to spite Miss Montag.  But that madeit all the more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the dooragain, he saw Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway ofthe dining room.  They had probably been standing there ever since K.
had opened the door, they avoided seeming to observe K. but chattedlightly and followed his movements with glances, the absent mindedglances to the side such as you make during a conversation.  But theseglances were heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back intohis own room.




Chapter FiveThe whip-man
One evening, a few days later, K. was walking along one of thecorridors that separated his office from the main stairway - he wasnearly the last one to leave for home that evening, there remained onlya couple of workers in the light of a single bulb in the dispatchdepartment - when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he hadhimself never opened but which he had always thought just led into ajunk room.  He stood in amazement and listened again to establishwhether he might not be mistaken.  For a while there was silence, butthen came some more sighs.  His first thought was to fetch one of theservitors, it might well have been worth having a witness present, butthen he was taken by an uncontrollable curiosity that make him simplyyank the door open.  It was, as he had thought, a junk room.  Old,unusable forms, empty stone ink-bottles lay scattered behind theentrance.  But in the cupboard-like room itself stood three men,crouching under the low ceiling.  A candle fixed on a shelf gave themlight.  "What are you doing here?" asked K. quietly, but crossly andwithout thinking.  One of the men was clearly in charge, and attractedattention by being dressed in a kind of dark leather costume which lefthis neck and chest and his arms exposed.  He did not answer.  But theother two called out, "Mr. K.!  We're to be beaten because you made acomplaint about us to the examining judge."  And now, K. finallyrealised that it was actually the two policemen, Franz and Willem, andthat the third man held a cane in his hand with which to beat them.
"Well," said K., staring at them, "I didn't make any complaint, I onlysaid what took place in my home.  And your behaviour was not entirelyunobjectionable, after all."  "Mr. K.," said Willem, while Franz clearlytried to shelter behind him as protection from the third man, "if youknew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so badly of us.  I've gota family to feed, and Franz here wanted to get married, you just have toget more money where you can, you can't do it just by working hard, nothowever hard you try.  I was sorely tempted by your fine clothes,policemen aren't allowed to do that sort of thing, course they aren't,and it wasn't right of us, but it's tradition that the clothes go to theofficers, that's how it's always been, believe me; and it'sunderstandable too, isn't it, what can things like that mean for anyoneunlucky enough to be arrested?  But if he starts talking about it openlythen the punishment has to follow."  "I didn't know about any of thisthat you've been telling me, and I made no sort of request that you bepunished, I was simply acting on principle."  "Franz," said Willem,turning to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the gentlemandidn't say he wanted us to be punished?  Now you can hear for yourself,he didn't even know we'd have to be punished."  "Don't you let thempersuade you, talking like that," said the third man to K., "thispunishment is both just and unavoidable."  "Don't listen to him," saidWillem, interrupting himself only to quickly bring his hand to his mouthwhen it had received a stroke of the cane, "we're only being punishedbecause you made a complaint against us.  Nothing would have happened tous otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done.  Can you callthat justice?  Both of us, me especially, we'd proved our worth as goodpolice officers over a long period - you've got to admit yourself thatas far as official work was concerned we did the job well - thingslooked good for us, we had prospects, it's quite certain that wewould've been made whip-men too, like this one, only he had the luck notto have anyone make a complaint about him, as you really don't get manycomplaints like that.  Only that's all finished now, Mr. K., our careersare at an end, we're going to have to do work now that's far inferior topolice work and besides all this we're going to get this terrible,painful beating."  "Can the cane really cause so much pain, then?" askedK., testing the cane that the whip-man swang in front of him.  "We'regoing to have to strip off totally naked," said Willem.  "Oh, I see,"said K., looking straight at the whip-man, his skin was burned brownlike a sailor's, and his face showed health and vigour.  "Is therethen no possibility of sparing these two their beating?" he asked him.
"No," said the whip-man, shaking his head with a laugh.  "Getundressed!" he ordered the policemen.  And to K. he said, "You shouldn'tbelieve everything they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it'salready made them a bit weak in the head.  This one here, for instance,"he pointed at Willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects,it's just ridiculous.  Look at him, look how fat he is - the firststrokes of the cane will just get lost in all that fat.   Do you knowwhat it is that's made him so fat?  He's in the habit of, everyone thatgets arrested by him, he eats their breakfast.  Didn't he eat up yourbreakfast?  Yeah, I thought as much.  But a man with a belly like thatcan't be made into a whip-man and never will be, that is quite out ofthe question."  "There are whip-men like that," Willem insisted, who hadjust released the belt of this trousers.  "No," said the whip-man,striking him such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made himwince, "you shouldn't be listening to this, just get undressed."  "Iwould make it well worth your while if you would let them go," said K.,and without looking at the whip-man again - as such matters are bestcarried on with both pairs of eyes turned down - he pulled out hiswallet.  "And then you'd try and put in a complaint against me, too,"said the whip-man, "and get me flogged.  No, no!"  "Now, do bereasonable," said K., "if I had wanted to get these two punished I wouldnot now be trying to buy their freedom, would I.  I could simply closethe door here behind me, go home and see or hear nothing more of it.
But that's not what I'm doing, it really is of much more importance tome to let them go free; if I had realised they would be punished, oreven that they might be punished, I would never have named them in thefirst place as they are not the ones I hold responsible.  It's theorganisation that's to blame, the high officials are the ones to blame.""That's how it is!" shouted the policemen, who then immediately receivedanother blow on their backs, which were by now exposed.  "If you had asenior judge here beneath your stick," said K., pressing down the caneas he spoke to stop it being raised once more, "I really would donothing to stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to giveyou all the more strength."  "Yeah, that's all very plausible, whatyou're saying there," said the whip-man, "only I'm not the sort ofperson you can bribe.  It's my job to flog people, so I flog them."Franz, the policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably inexpectation of a good result from K.'s intervention, but now he steppedforward to the door wearing just his trousers, kneeled down hanging onto K.'s arm and whispered, "Even if you can't get mercy shown for bothof us, at least try and get me set free.  Willem is older than me, he'sless sensitive than me in every way, he even got a light beating acouple of years ago, but my record's still clean, I only did things theway I did because Willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both forgood and bad.  Down in front of the bank my poor bride is waiting for meat the entrance, I'm so ashamed of myself, it's pitiful."  His face wasflowing over with tears, and he wiped it dry on K.'s coat.  "I'm notgoing to wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane inboth hands and laying in to Franz while Willem cowered back in a cornerand looked on secretly, not even daring to turn his head.  Then, thesudden scream that shot out from Franz was long and irrevocable, itseemed to come not from a human being but from an instrument that wasbeing tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heardby everyone in the building.  "Don't shout like that!", called out K.,unable to prevent himself, and, as he looked anxiously in the directionfrom which the servitor would come, he gave Franz a shove, not hard, buthard enough for him to fall down unconscious, clawing at the ground withhis hands by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod stillfound him on the floor; the tip of the rod swang regularly up and downwhile he rolled to and fro under its blows.  And now one of theservitors appeared in the distance, with another a few steps behind him.
K. had quickly thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the windowsoverlooking the yard and opened it.  The screams had completely stopped.
So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he called out, "It's only me!""Good evening, chief clerk," somebody called back.  "Is there anythingwrong?"  "No, no," answered K., "it's only a dog yelping in the yard."There was no sound from the servitors so he added, "You can go back towhat you were doing."  He did not want to become involved with aconversation with them, and so he leant out of the window.  A littlewhile later, when he looked out in the corridor, they had already gone.
Now, K. remained at the window, he did not dare go back into the junkroom, and he did not want to go home either.  The yard he looked downinto was small and rectangular, all around it were offices, all thewindows were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflectionof the moon.  K tried hard to see into the darkness of one corner of theyard, where a few handcarts had been left behind one another. He feltanguish at not having been able to prevent the flogging, but that wasnot his fault, if Franz had not screamed like that - clearly it musthave caused a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain controlof oneself at important moments - if Franz had not screamed then it wasat least highly probable that K. would have been able to dissuade thewhip-man.  If all the junior officers were contemptible why would thewhip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception,and K. had noticed very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw thebanknotes, he had obviously only seemed serious about the flogging toraise the level of the bribe a little. And K. had not been ungenerous,he really had wanted to get the policemen freed; if he really had nowbegun to do something against  the degeneracy of the court then it was amatter of course that he would have to do something here as well.  Butof course, it became impossible for him to do anything as soon as Franzstarted screaming.  K. could not possibly have let the junior bankstaff, and perhaps even all sorts of other people, come along and catchhim by surprise as he haggled with those people in the junk room.
Nobody could really expect that sort of sacrifice of him.  If that hadbeen his intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would havetaken his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in thepolicemen's place.  The whip-man would certainly not have accepted thissubstitution anyway, as in that way he would have seriously violated hisduty without gaining any benefit.  He would most likely have violatedhis duty twice over, as court employees were probably under orders notto cause any harm to K. while he was facing charges, although there mayhave been special conditions in force here.  However things stood, K.
was able to do no more than throw the door shut, even though that wouldstill do nothing to remove all the dangers he faced.  It was regrettablethat he had given Franz a shove, and it could only be excused by theheat of the moment.

In the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did notwant them to be too aware of his presence, so he closed the window andwalked towards the main staircase.  At the door of the junk room hestopped and listened for a little while.  All was silent.  The twopolicemen were entirely at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beatenthem to death.  K. reached his hand out for the door handle but drew itsuddenly back.  He was no longer in any position to help anyone, and theservitors would soon be back;  he did, though, promise himself that hewould raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as itwas in his power, those who really were guilty, the high officials whomnobody had so far dared point out to him, received their due punishment.
As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank,  he lookedcarefully round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to beseen who might have been waiting for somebody, not even within somedistance from the bank.  Franz's claim that his bride was waiting forhim was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable andintended only to elicit more sympathy.

The policemen were still on K.'s mind all through the followingday; he was unable to concentrate on his work and had to stay in hisoffice a little longer than the previous day so that he could finish it.
On the way home, as he passed by the junk room again, he opened its dooras if that had been his habit.  Instead of the darkness he expected, hesaw everything unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know howhe should respond.  Everything was exactly the same as he had seen itwhen he had opened the door the previous evening.   The forms andbottles of ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, thetwo policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the twopolicemen began to wail and call out "Mr. K.!"  K. slammed the doorimmediately shut, and even thumped on it with his fists as if that wouldshut it all the firmer.  Almost in tears, he ran to the servitorsworking quietly at the copying machine.  "Go and get that junk roomcleared out!" he shouted, and, in amazement, they stopped what they weredoing. "It should have been done long ago, we're sinking in dirt!"  Theywould be able to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it was too late inthe evening to make them do it there and then as he had originallyintended.  He sat down briefly in order to keep them near him for alittle longer, looked through a few of the copies to give the impressionthat he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not dareto leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mindnumb.




Chapter SixK.'s uncle - Leni
One afternoon - K. was very busy at the time, getting the postready - K.'s Uncle Karl, a small country land owner, came into the room,pushing his way between two of the staff who were bringing in somepapers.   K. had long expected his uncle to appear, but the sight of himnow shocked K. far less than the prospect of it had done a long timebefore.  His uncle was bound to come, K. had been sure of that for abouta month.  He already thought at the time he could see how his unclewould arrive, slightly bowed, his battered panama hat in his left hand,his right hand already stretched out over the desk long before he wasclose enough as he rushed carelessly towards K. knocking over everythingthat was in his way.  K.'s uncle was always in a hurry, as he sufferedfrom the unfortunate belief that he had a number of things to do while hewas in the big city and had to settle all of them in one day - hisvisits were only ever for one day - and at the same time thought hecould not forgo any conversation or piece of business or pleasure thatmight arise by chance.  Uncle Karl was K.'s former guardian, and so K.
was duty-bound to help him in all of this as well as to offer him a bedfor the night.  'I'm haunted by a ghost from the country', he would say.

As soon as they had greeted each other - K. had invited him to sitin the armchair but Uncle Karl had no time for that - he said he wantedto speak briefly with K. in private.  "It is necessary," he said with atired gulp, "it is necessary for my peace of mind."   K. immediatelysent the junior staff from the room and told them to let no-one in.
"What's this that I've been hearing, Josef?" cried K.'s uncle when theywere alone, as he sat on the table shoving various papers under himselfwithout looking at them to make himself more comfortable.  K. saidnothing, he knew what was coming, but, suddenly relieved from the effortof the work he had been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitude andlooked out the window at the other side of the street.  From where hesat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of theempty walls of houses between two shop windows.  "You're staring out thewindow!" called out his uncle, raising his arms, "For God's sake, Josef,give me an answer!  Is it true, can it really be true?"  "Uncle Karl,"said K., wrenching himself back from his daydreaming, "I really don'tknow what it is you want of me."  "Josef," said his uncle in a warningtone, "as far as I know, you've always told the truth.  Am I to takewhat you've just said as a bad sign?"  "I think I know what it is youwant," said K. obediently, "I expect you've heard about my trial.""That's right," answered his uncle with a slow nod, "I've heard aboutyour trial."  "Who did you hear it from, then?" asked K.  "Erna wrote tome," said his uncle, "she doesn't have much contact with you, it's true,you don't pay very much attention to her, I'm afraid to say, but shelearned about it nonetheless.  I got her letter today and, of course, Icame straight here.  And for no other reason, but it seems to me thatthis is reason enough.  I can read you out the part of the letter thatconcerns you."  He drew the letter out from his wallet.  "Here it is.
She writes; 'I have not seen Josef for a long time, I was in the banklast week but Josef was so busy that they would not let me through; Iwaited there for nearly an hour but then I had to go home as I had mypiano lesson.  I would have liked to have spoken to him, maybe therewill be a chance another time.  He sent me a big box of chocolates formy name-day, that was very nice and attentive of him.  I forgot to tellyou about it when I wrote, and I only remember now that you ask me aboutit.  Chocolate, as I am sure you are aware, disappears straight away inthis lodging house, almost as soon as you know somebody has given youchocolate it is gone.  But there is something else I wanted to tell youabout Josef.  Like I said, they would not let me through to see him atthe bank because he was negotiating with some gentleman just then.
After I had been waiting quietly for quite a long time I asked one ofthe staff whether his meeting would last much longer.  He said it mightwell do, as it was probably about the legal proceedings, he said, thatwere being conducted against him.   I asked what sort of legalproceedings it was that were being conducted against the chief clerk,and whether he was not making some mistake, but he said he was notmaking any mistake, there were legal proceedings underway and even thatthey were about something quite serious, but he did not know any moreabout it.   He would have liked to have been of some help to the chiefclerk himself, as the chief clerk was a gentleman, good and honest, buthe did not know what it was he could do and merely hoped there would besome influential gentlemen who would take his side.  I'm sure that iswhat will happen and that everything will turn out for the best in theend, but in the mean time things do not look at all good, and you cansee that from the mood of the chief clerk himself.  Of course, I did notplace too much importance on this conversation, and even did my best toput the bank clerk's mind at rest, he was quite a simple man.  I toldhim he was not to speak to anyone else about this, and I think it is alljust a rumour, but I still think it might be good if you, Dear Father,if you looked into the matter the next time you visit.   It will be easyfor you to find out more detail and, if it is really necessary, to dosomething about it through the great and influential people you know.
But if it is not necessary, and that is what seems most likely, then atleast your daughter will soon have the chance to embrace you and I lookforward to it.' - She's a good child," said K.'s uncle when he hadfinished reading, and wiped a few tears from his eyes.  K. nodded.  Withall the different disruptions he had had recently he had completelyforgotten about Erna, even her birthday, and the story of the chocolateshad clearly just been invented so that he wouldn't get in trouble withhis aunt and uncle.  It was very touching, and even the theatre tickets,which he would regularly send her from then on, would not be enough torepay her,  but he really did not feel, now, that it was right for himto visit her in her lodgings and hold conversations with a little,eighteen year old schoolgirl.  "And what do you have to say about that?"asked his uncle, who had forgotten all his rush and excitement as he readthe letter, and seemed to be about to read it again.  "Yes, Uncle," saidK., "it is true."  "True!" called out his uncle. "What is true?  How canthis be true?  What sort of trial is it?  Not a criminal trial, I hope?""It's a criminal trial," answered K.  "And you sit quietly here whileyou've got a criminal trial round your neck?" shouted his uncle, gettingever louder.  "The more calm I am, the better it will be for theoutcome," said K. in a tired voice, "don't worry."  "How can I helpworrying?!" shouted his uncle, "Josef, my Dear Josef, think aboutyourself, about your family, think about our good name!  Up till now,you've always been our pride, don't now become our disgrace.  I don'tlike the way you're behaving," he said, looking at K. with his head atan angle, "that's not how an innocent man behaves when he's accused ofsomething, not if he's still got any strength in him.  Just tell me whatit's all about so that I can help you.  It's something to do with thebank, I take it?"  "No," said K. as he stood up, "and you're speakingtoo loud, Uncle, I expect one of the staff is listening at the door andI find that rather unpleasant.  It's best if we go somewhere else, thenI can answer all your questions, as far as I can.  And I know very wellthat I have to account to the family for what I do."  "You certainlydo!" his uncle shouted, "Quite right, you do.  Now just get a move on,Josef, hurry up now!"  "I still have a few documents I need to prepare,"said K., and, using the intercom, he summoned his deputy who entered afew moments later.  K.'s uncle, still angry and excited, gestured withhis hand to show that K. had summoned him, even though there was no needwhatever to do so.  K. stood in front of the desk and explained to theyoung man, who listened calm and attentive, what would need to be donethat day in his absence, speaking in a calm voice and making use ofvarious documents.   The presence of K.'s uncle while this was going onwas quite disturbing; he did not listen to what was being said,  but atfirst he stood there with eyes wide open and nervously biting his lips.
Then he began to walk up and down the room, stopped now and then at thewindow, or stood in front of a picture always making variousexclamations such as, "That is totally incomprehensible to me!" or "Nowjust tell me, what are you supposed to make of that?!"  The young manpretended to notice nothing of this and listened to K.'s instructionsthrough to the end, he made a few notes, bowed to both K. and his uncleand then left the room.  K.'s uncle had turned his back to him and waslooking out the window, bunching up the curtains with his outstretchedhands.  The door had hardly closed when he called out, "At last!  Nowthat he's stopped jumping about we can go too!"  Once they were in thefront hall of the bank, where several members of staff were standingabout and where, just then, the deputy director was walking across,there was unfortunately no way of stopping K.'s uncle from continuallyasking questions about the trial.  "Now then, Josef," he began, lightlyacknowledging the bows from those around them as they passed, "tell meeverything about this trial; what sort of trial is it?"  K. made a fewcomments which conveyed little information, even laughed a little, andit  was only when they reached the front steps that he explained to hisuncle that he had not wanted to talk openly in front of those people.
"Quite right," said his uncle, "but now start talking."  With his headto one side, and smoking his cigar in short, impatient draughts, helistened.  "First of all, Uncle," said K., "it's not a trial like you'dhave in a normal courtroom."  "So much the worse," said his uncle.
"How's that?" asked K., looking at him.  "What I mean is, that's for theworse," he repeated.  They were standing on the front steps of the bank;as the doorkeeper seemed to be listening to what they were saying K.
drew his uncle down further, where they were absorbed into the bustle ofthe street.  His uncle took K.'s arm and stopped asking questions withsuch urgency about the trial, they walked on for a while in silence.
"But how did all this come about?" he eventually asked, stoppingabruptly enough to startle the people walking behind, who had to avoidwalking into him.  "Things like this don't come all of a sudden, theystart developing a long time beforehand, there must have been warningsigns of it, why didn't you write to me?  You know I'd do anything foryou, to some extent I am still your guardian, and until today that'ssomething I was proud of.  I'll still help you, of course I will, onlynow, now that the trial is already underway, it makes it very difficult.
But whatever; the best thing now is for you to take a short holidaystaying with us in the country.  You've lost weight, I can see that now.
The country life will give you strength, that will be good, there'sbound to be a lot of hard work ahead of you.  But besides that it'll bea way of getting you away from the court, to some extent.  Here they'vegot every means of showing the powers at their disposal and they'reautomatically bound to use them against you; in the country they'lleither have to delegate authority to different bodies or just have totry and bother you by letter, telegram or telephone.  And that's boundto weaken the effect, it won't release you from them but it'll give youroom to breathe."  "You could forbid me to leave," said K., who had beendrawn slightly into his uncle's way of thinking by what he had beensaying.  "I didn't think you would do it," said his uncle thoughtfully,"you won't suffer too much loss of power by moving away."  K. graspedhis uncle under the arm to prevent him stopping still and said, "Ithought you'd think all this is less important than I do, and now you'retaking it so hard."  "Josef," called his uncle trying to disentanglehimself from him so that he could stop walking, but K. did not let go,"you've completely changed, you used to be so astute, are you losing itnow?  Do you want to lose the trial?  Do you realise what that wouldmean?  That would mean you would be simply destroyed.  And that everyoneyou know would be pulled down with you or at the very least humiliated,disgraced right down to the ground.  Josef, pull yourself together.  Theway you're so indifferent about it, it's driving me mad.  Looking at youI can almost believe that old saying: 'Having a trial like that meanslosing a trial like that'."  "My dear Uncle," said K., "it won't do anygood to get excited, it's no good for you to do it and it'd be no goodfor me to do it.  The case won't be won by getting excited, and pleaseadmit that my practical experience counts for something, just as I havealways and still do respect your experience, even when it surprises me.
You say that the family will also be affected by this trial; I reallycan't see how, but that's beside the point and I'm quite willing tofollow your instructions in all of this.  Only, I don't see anyadvantage in staying in the country, not even for you, as that wouldindicate flight and a sense of guilt.  And besides, although I am moresubject to persecution if I stay in the city I can also press the matterforward better here."  "You're right," said his uncle in a tone thatseemed to indicate they were finally coming closer to each other, "Ijust made the suggestion because, as I saw it, if you stay in the citythe case will be put in danger by your indifference to it, and I thoughtit was better if I did the work for you.  But will you push thingsforward yourself with all your strength, if so, that will naturally befar better."  "We're agreed then," said K.  "And do you have anysuggestions for what I should do next?"  "Well, naturally I'll have tothink about it," said his uncle, "you must bear in mind that I've beenliving in the country for twenty years now, almost without a break, youlose your ability to deal with matters like this.  But I do have someimportant connections with several people who, I expect, know their wayaround these things better than I do, and to contact them is a matter ofcourse.  Out there in the country I've been getting out of condition,I'm sure you're already aware of that.  It's only at times like thisthat you notice it yourself.  And this affair of yours came largelyunexpected, although, oddly enough, I had expected something of the sortafter I'd read Erna's letter, and today when I saw your face I knew itwith almost total certainty.  But all that is by the by, the importantthing now is, we have no time to lose."  Even while he was stillspeaking, K.'s uncle had stood on tiptoe to summon a taxi and now hepulled K. into the car behind himself as he called out an address to thedriver.  "We're going now to see Dr. Huld, the lawyer," he said, "wewere at school together.  I'm sure you know the name, don't you?  No?Well that is odd.  He's got a very good reputation as a defencebarrister and for working with the poor.  But I esteem him especially assomeone you can trust."  "It's alright with me, whatever you do," saidK., although he was made uneasy by the rushed and urgent way his unclewas dealing with the matter.  It was not very encouraging, as theaccused, be to taken to a lawyer for poor people.  "I didn't know," hesaid, "that you could take on a lawyer in matters like this."  "Well ofcourse you can," said his uncle, "that goes without saying.  Whywouldn't you take on a lawyer?  And now, so that I'm properly instructedin this matter, tell me what's been happening so far."  K. instantlybegan telling his uncle about what had been happening, holding nothingback - being completely open with him was the only way that K. couldprotest at his uncle's belief that the trial was a great disgrace.  Hementioned Miss Bürstner's name just once and in passing, but that didnothing to diminish his openness about the trial as Miss Bürstner had noconnection with it.  As he spoke, he looked out the window and saw how,just then, they were getting closer to the suburb where the courtoffices were.  He drew this to his uncle's attention, but he did notfind the coincidence especially remarkable.  The taxi stopped in frontof a dark building.  K.'s uncle knocked at the very first door at groundlevel; while they waited he smiled, showing his big teeth, andwhispered, "Eight o'clock; not the usual sort of time to be visiting alawyer, but Huld won't mind it from me."  Two large, black eyes appearedin the spy-hatch in the door, they stared at the two visitors for awhile and then disappeared; the door, however, did not open.  K. and hisuncle confirmed to each other the fact that they had seen the two eyes.
"A new maid, afraid of strangers," said K.'s uncle, and knocked again.
The eyes appeared once more.  This time they seemed almost sad, but theopen gas flame that burned with a hiss close above their heads gave offlittle light and that may have merely created an illusion.  "Open thedoor," called K.'s uncle, raising his fist against it, "we are friendsof Dr. Huld, the lawyer!"  "Dr. Huld is ill," whispered someone behindthem.  In a doorway at the far end of a narrow passage stood a man inhis dressing gown, giving them this information in an extremely quietvoice.  K.'s uncle, who had already been made very angry by the longwait, turned abruptly round and retorted, "Ill?  You say he's ill?" andstrode towards the gentleman in a way that seemed almost threatening, asif he were the illness himself.  "They've opened the door for you, now,"said the gentleman, pointing at the door of the lawyer.  He pulled hisdressing gown together and disappeared.  The door had indeed beenopened, a young girl - K. recognised the dark, slightly bulging eyes -stood in the hallway in a long white apron, holding a candle in herhand.  "Next time, open up sooner!" said K.'s uncle instead of agreeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey. "Come along, Josef," hethen said to K. who was slowly moving over towards the girl. "Dr. Huldis unwell," said the girl as K.'s uncle, without stopping, rushedtowards one of the doors.  K. continued to look at the girl in amazementas she turned round to block the way into the living room, she had around face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheeks and the chin wereround but the temples and the hairline were too.  "Josef!" called hisuncle once more, and he asked the girl, "It's trouble with his heart, isit?"  "I think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time togo ahead with the candle and open the door into the room. In one cornerof the room, where the light of the candle did not reach, a face with along beard looked up from the bed.  "Leni, who's this coming in?" askedthe lawyer, unable to recognise his guests because he was dazzled by thecandle.  "It's your old friend, Albert," said K.'s uncle.  "Oh, Albert,"said the lawyer, falling back onto his pillow as if this visit meant hewould not need to keep up appearances.  "Is it really as bad as that?"asked K.'s uncle, sitting on the edge of the bed.  "I don't believe itis.  It's a recurrence of your heart trouble and it'll pass over likethe other times."  "Maybe," said the lawyer quietly, "but it's just asmuch trouble as it's ever been.  I can hardly breathe, I can't sleep atall and I'm getting weaker by the day."  "I see," said K.'s uncle,pressing his panama hat firmly against his knee with his big hand.
"That is bad news.  But are you getting the right sort of care?  Andit's so depressing in here, it's so dark.  It's a long time since I waslast here, but it seemed to me friendlier then.  Even your young ladyhere doesn't seem to have much life in her, unless she's justpretending."  The maid was still standing by the door with the candle;as far as could be made out, she was watching K. more than she waswatching his uncle even while the latter was still speaking about her.
K. leant against a chair that he had pushed near to the girl.  "Whenyou're as ill as I am," said the lawyer, "you need to have peace.  Idon't find it depressing."  After a short pause he added, "and Lenilooks after me well, she's a good girl."  But that was not enough topersuade K.'s uncle, he had visibly taken against his friend's carerand, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecuted herwith his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on thebedside table and, leaning over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidyingthe pillows.  K.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to show anyconsideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walked up anddown behind the carer, and K. would not have been surprised if he hadgrabbed hold of her skirts behind her and dragged her away from the bed.
K. himself looked on calmly, he was not even disappointed at finding thelawyer unwell, he had been able to do nothing to oppose the enthusiasmhis uncle had developed for the matter, he was glad that this enthusiasmhad now been distracted without his having to do anything about it.  Hisuncle, probably simply wishing to be offensive to the lawyer'sattendant, then said, "Young lady, now please leave us alone for awhile, I have some personal matters to discuss with my friend."  Dr.
Huld's carer was still leant far over the invalid's bed and smoothingout the cloth covering the wall next to it, she merely turned her headand then, in striking contrast with the anger that first stopped K.'suncle from speaking and then let the words out in a gush, she said veryquietly, "You can see that Dr. Huld is so ill that he can't discuss anymatters at all."  It was probably just for the sake of convenience thatshe had repeated the words spoken by K.'s uncle, but an onlooker mighteven have perceived it as mocking him and he, of course, jumped up as ifhe had just been stabbed.  "You damned ...," in the first gurglings ofhis excitement his words could hardly be understood, K. was startledeven though he had been expecting something of the sort and ran to hisuncle with the intention, no doubt, of closing his mouth with both hishands.  Fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raised himselfup, K.'s uncle made an ugly face as if swallowing something disgustingand then, somewhat calmer, said, "We have naturally not lost our senses,not yet; if what I am asking for were not possible I would not be askingfor it.  Now please, go!"  The carer stood up straight by the beddirectly facing K.'s uncle, K. thought he noticed that with one hand shewas stroking the lawyer's hand.  "You can say anything in front ofLeni," said the invalid, in a tone that was unmistakably imploring.
"It's not my business," said K.'s uncle, "and it's not my secrets."  Andhe twisted himself round as if wanting to go into no more negotiationsbut giving himself a little more time to think. "Whose business is itthen?" asked the lawyer in an exhausted voice as he leant back again.
"My nephew's," said K.'s uncle, "and I've brought him along with me."And he introduced him, "Chief Clerk Josef K."  "Oh!" said the invalid,now with much more life in him, and reached out his hand towards K.  "Doforgive me, I didn't notice you there at all."  Then he then said to hiscarer, "Leni, go," stretching his hand out to her as if this were afarewell that would have to last for a long time.  This time the girloffered no resistance.  "So you," he finally said to K.'s uncle, who hadalso calmed down and stepped closer, "you haven't come to visit mebecause I'm ill but you've come on business."  The lawyer now looked somuch stronger that it seemed the idea of being visited because he wasill had somehow made him weak, he remained supporting himself of oneelbow, which must have been rather tiring, and continually pulled at alock of hair in the middle of his beard.  "You already look muchbetter," said K.'s uncle, "now that that witch has gone outside." Heinterrupted himself, whispered, "I bet you she's listening!" and sprangover to the door.  But behind the door there was no-one, K.'s uncle cameback not disappointed, as her not listening seemed to him worse than ifshe had been, but probably somewhat embittered.  "You're mistaken abouther," said the lawyer, but did nothing more to defend her; perhaps thatwas his way of indicating that she did not need defending.  But in atone that was much more committed he went on, "As far as your nephew'saffairs are concerned, this will be an extremely difficult undertakingand I'd count myself lucky if my strength lasted out long enough for it;I'm greatly afraid it won't do, but anyway I don't want to leaveanything untried; if I don't last out you can always get somebody else.
To be honest, this matter interests me too much, and I can't bringmyself to give up the chance of taking some part in it.  If my heartdoes totally give out then at least it will have found a worthy affairto fail in."  K. believed he understood not a word of this entirespeech, he looked at his uncle for an explanation but his uncle sat onthe bedside table with the candle in his hand, a medicine bottle hadrolled off the table onto the floor, he nodded to everything the lawyersaid, agreed to everything, and now and then looked at K. urging him toshow the same compliance.  Maybe K.'s uncle had already told the lawyerabout the trial.  But that was impossible, everything that had happenedso far spoke against it.  So he said,"I don't understand ..."  "Well, maybe I've misunderstood what you'vebeen saying," said the lawyer, just as astonished and embarrassed as K.
"Perhaps I've been going too fast.  What was it you wanted to speak tome about?  I thought it was to do with your trial."  "Of course it is,"said K.'s uncle, who then asked K., "So what is it you want?"  "Yes, buthow is it that you know anything about me and my case?" asked K.  "Oh, Isee," said the lawyer with a smile.  "I am a lawyer, I move in courtcircles, people talk about various different cases and the moreinteresting ones stay in your mind, especially when they concern thenephew of a friend.  There's nothing very remarkable about that."  "Whatis it you want, then?" asked K.'s uncle once more, "You seem so uneasyabout it"  "You move in this court's circles?" asked K.  "Yes," said thelawyer.  "You're asking questions like a child," said K.'s uncle.  "Whatcircles should I move in, then, if not with members of my owndiscipline?" the lawyer added.  It sounded so indisputable that K. gaveno answer at all.  "But you work in the High Court, not that court inthe attic," he had wanted to say but could not bring himself to actuallyutter it.  "You have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as ifhe were explaining something obvious, unnecessary and incidental,  "youhave to realise that I also derive great advantage for my clients frommixing with those people, and do so in many different ways, it's notsomething you can keep talking about all the time.  I'm at a bit of adisadvantage now, of course, because of my illness, but I still getvisits from some good friends of mine at the court and I learn one ortwo things.  It might even be that I learn more than many of those whoare in the best of health and spend all day in court.  And I'm receivinga very welcome visit right now, for instance."  And he pointed into adark corner of the room.  "Where?" asked K., almost uncouth in hissurprise.  He looked round uneasily; the little candle gave off far toolittle light to reach as far as the wall opposite.  And then, somethingdid indeed begin to move there in the corner.  In the light of thecandle held up by K.'s uncle an elderly gentleman could be seen sittingbeside a small table.  He had been sitting there for so long withoutbeing noticed that he could hardly have been breathing.  Now he stood upwith a great deal of fuss, clearly unhappy that attention had been drawnto him.  It was as if, by flapping his hands about like short wings, hehoped to deflect any introductions and greetings, as if he wanted on noaccount to disturb the others by his presence and seemed to be exhortingthem to leave him back in the dark and forget about his being there.
That, however, was something that could no longer be granted him.  "Youtook us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation,cheerfully indicating to the gentleman that he should come closer,which, slowly, hesitatingly, looking all around him, but with a certaindignity, he did.  "The office director - oh, yes, forgive me, I haven'tintroduced you - this is my friend Albert K., this is his nephew, thechief clerk Josef K., and this is the office director - so, the officedirector was kind enough to pay me a visit.  It's only possible toappreciate just how valuable a visit like this is if you've been letinto the secret of what a pile of work the office director has heapedover him.  Well, he came anyway, we were having a peaceful chat, as faras I was able when I'm so weak, and although we hadn't told Leni shemustn't let anyone in as we weren't expecting anyone, we still wouldrather have remained alone, but then along came you, Albert, thumpingyour fists on the door, the office director moved over into the cornerpulling his table and chair with him, but now it turns out we mighthave, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something todiscuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come backtogether again.  - Office director  ...," he said with his head on oneside, pointing with a humble smile to an armchair near the bed.  "I'mafraid I'll only be able to stay a few minutes more," smiled the officedirector as he spread himself out in the armchair and looked at theclock.  "Business calls.  But I wouldn't want to miss the chance ofmeeting a friend of my friend."  He inclined his head slightly towardK.'s uncle, who seemed very happy with his new acquaintance, but he wasnot the sort of person to express his feelings of deference andresponded to the office director's words with embarrassed, but loud,laughter.  A horrible sight!  K. was able to quietly watch everything asnobody paid any attention to him, the office director took over asleader of the conversation as seemed to be his habit once he had beencalled forward, the lawyer listened attentively with his hand to hisear, his initial weakness having perhaps only had the function ofdriving away his new visitors, K.'s uncle served as candle-bearer -balancing the candle on his thigh while the office director frequentlyglanced nervously at it - and was soon free of his embarrassment and wasquickly enchanted not only by the office director's speaking manner butalso by the gentle, waving hand-movements with which he accompanied it.
K., leaning against the bedpost, was totally ignored by the officedirector, perhaps deliberately, and served the old man only as audience.
And besides, he had hardly any idea what the conversation was about andhis thoughts soon turned to the care assistant and the ill treatment shehad suffered from his uncle.  Soon after, he began to wonder whether hehad not seen the office director somewhere before, perhaps among thepeople who were at his first hearing.  He may have been mistaken, butthought the office director might well have been among the old gentlemenwith the thin beards in the first row.

There was then a noise that everyone heard from the hallway as ifsomething of porcelain were being broken.  "I'll go and see what'shappened," said K., who slowly left the room as if giving the others thechance to stop him.  He had hardly stepped into the hallway, finding hisbearings in the darkness with his hand still firmly holding the door,when another small hand, much smaller than K.'s own, placed itself onhis and gently shut the door.  It was the carer who had been waitingthere.  "Nothing has happened," she whispered to him, "I just threw aplate against the wall to get you out of there."   "I was thinking aboutyou, as well," replied K. uneasily.  "So much the better," said thecarer.  "Come with me".  A few steps along, they came to a frosted glassdoor which the carer opened for him.  "Come in here," she said.  It wasclearly the lawyer's office, fitted out with old, heavy furniture, asfar as could be seen in the moonlight which now illuminated just asmall, rectangular section of the floor by each of the three bigwindows.  "This way," said the carer, pointing to a dark trunk with acarved, wooden backrest.  When he had sat down, K. continued to lookround the room, it was a large room with a high ceiling, the clients ofthis lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it.  K. thought hecould see the little steps with which visitors would approach themassive desk.  But then he forgot about all of this and had eyes onlyfor the carer who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him againstthe armrest.  "I did think," she said "you would come out here to me byyourself without me having to call you first.  It was odd.  First you stareat me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting.  And youought to call me Leni, too," she added quickly and suddenly, as if nomoment of this conversation should be lost.  "Gladly," said K.  "But asfor its being odd, Leni, that's easy to explain.  Firstly, I had tolisten to what the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a goodreason, but secondly I'm not a bold  person, if anything I'm quite shy,and you, Leni, you didn't really look like you could be won over in onestroke, either."  "That's not it," said Leni, laying one arm on thearmrest and looking at K., "you didn't like me, and I don't suppose youlike me now, either."  "Liking wouldn't be very much," said K.,evasively.  "Oh!" she exclaimed with a smile, thus making use of  K.'scomment to gain an advantage over him.  So K. remained silent for awhile.  By now, he had become used to the darkness in the room and wasable to make out various fixtures and fittings.  He was especiallyimpressed by a large picture hanging to the right of the door, he leantforward in order to see it better.  It depicted a man wearing a judge'srobes; he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forthfrom the picture.  The odd thing about the picture was that this judgewas not sitting there in dignified calm but had his left arm pressedagainst the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completelyfree and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump upany moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even topass sentence.  The accused was probably meant to be imagined at thefoot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture,covered with a yellow carpet.  "That might be my judge," said K.,pointing to the picture with one finger.  "I know him," said Lenilooking up at the picture, "he comes here quite often.  That picture isfrom when he was young, but he can never have looked anything like it,as he's tiny, minute almost.  But despite that, he had himself made tolook bigger in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone roundhere.  But even I'm vain and that makes me very unhappy that you don'tlike me."  K. replied to that last comment merely by embracing Leni anddrawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder.  Tothe rest of it, though, he said, "What rank is he?"  "He's an examiningjudge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which K. held her andplaying with his fingers.  "Just an examining judge once again," said K.
in disappointment, "the senior officials keep themselves hidden.  Buthere he is sitting on a throne."  "That's all just made up," said Leniwith her face bent over K.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchenchair with an old horse blanket folded over it.  But do you have to bealways thinking about your trial?" she added slowly.  "No, not at all,"said K., "I probably even think too little about it."  "That's not themistake you're making," said Leni, "you're too unyielding, that's whatI've heard."  "Who said that?" asked K., he felt her body against hischest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair.  "I'd besaying too much if I told you that," answered Leni.  "Please don't askfor names, but do stop making these mistakes of yours, stop being sounyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend yourself from thiscourt, you have to confess.  So confess to them as soon as you get thechance.  It's only then that they give you the chance to get away, nottill then.  Only, without help from outside even that's impossible, butyou needn't worry about getting this help as I want to help you myself.""You understand a lot about this court and what sort of tricks areneeded," said K. as he lifted her, since she was pressing in much tooclose to him, onto his lap.  "That's alright, then," she said, and madeherself comfortable on his lap by smoothing out her skirt and adjustingher blouse.  Then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back andtook a long look at him.  "And what if I don't confess, could you nothelp me then?" asked K. to test her out.  I'm accumulating women to helpme, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first Miss Bürstner, thenthe court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seems tohave some incomprehensible need for me.  The way she sits on my lap asif it were her proper place!  "No," answered Leni, slowly shaking herhead, "I couldn't help you then.  But you don't want my help anyway, itmeans nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded."Then, after a while she asked, "Do you have a lover?"  "No," said K.
"Oh, you must have," she said.  "Well, I have really," said K.  "Justthink, I've even betrayed her while I'm carrying her photograph withme."  Leni insisted he show her a photograph of Elsa, and then, hunchedon his lap, studied the picture closely.  The photograph was not onethat had been taken while Elsa was posing for it, it showed her justafter she had been in a wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars,her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed herhands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one sidewith a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh wasintended for.  "She's very tightly laced," said Leni, pointing to theplace where she thought this could be seen.  "I don't like her, she'sclumsy and crude.  But maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you,that's the impression you get from the picture.  Big, strong girls likethat often don't know how to be anything but gentle and friendly.  Wouldshe be capable of sacrificing herself for you, though?"  "No," said K.,"she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable ofsacrificing herself for me.  But I've never yet asked any of thosethings of her.  I've never looked at this picture as closely as you.""You can't think much of her, then," said Leni. "She can't be your loverafter all."  "Yes she is," said K., "I'm not going to take my word backon that."  "Well she might be your lover now, then," said Leni, "but youwouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchanged her forsomebody else, me for instance."  "That is certainly conceivable," saidK. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, sheknows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't thinkabout it.  She wouldn't try to persuade me to be less unyielding."  "Wellthat's no advantage," said Leni.  "If she's got no advantage other thanthat, I can keep on hoping.  Has she got any bodily defects?"  "'Bodilydefects'?" asked K.  "Yeah," said Leni, "as I do have a bodily defect,just a little one.  Look."  She spread the middle and ring fingers ofher right hand apart from each other.  Between those fingers the flap ofskin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of thelittle finger.  In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it was shewanted to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel.
"What a freak of nature," said K., and when he had taken a look at thewhole hand he added, "What a pretty claw!"  Leni looked on with a kindof pride as K. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers inamazement, until, finally, he briefly kissed them and let go.  "Oh!" sheimmediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!"  Hurriedly, and with her mouthopen, she clambered up K.'s lap with her knees.  He was almost aghast ashe looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was abitter, irritating smell from her, like pepper, she grasped his head,leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting into hishair.  "I've taken her place!" she exclaimed from time to time.  "Justlook, now you've taken me instead of her!"   Just then, her knee slippedout and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, K.
tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled downwith her.  "Now you're mine," she said.  Her last words to him as heleft were, "Here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and sheplanted an undirected kiss on his back.  When he stepped out the frontdoor there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle ofthe street to see if he could still glimpse Leni at the window when K.'suncle leapt out of a car that K., thinking of other things, had not seenwaiting outside the building.  He took hold of K. by both arms andshoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him to it.  "Youngman," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?!  Things weregoing well with this business of yours, now you've caused it terribledamage.  You slip off with some dirty, little thing who, moreover, isobviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours.  You don't eventry to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite openabout it, you run off with her and stay there.  And meanwhile we'resitting there, your uncle who's going to such effort for you, the lawyerwho needs to be won over to your side, and above all the officedirector, a very important gentleman who is in direct command of youraffair in its present stage.  We wanted to discuss how best to help you,I had to handle the lawyer very carefully, he had to handle the officedirector carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give mesome support.  Instead of which you stay away.  Eventually we couldn'tkeep up the pretence any longer, but these are polite and highly capablemen, they didn't say anything about it so as to spare my feelings but inthe end not even they could continue to force themselves and, as theycouldn't speak about the matter in hand, they became silent.  We satthere for several minutes, listening to see whether you wouldn't finallycome back.  All in vain.  In the end the office director stood up, as hehad stayed far longer than he had originally intended, made hisfarewell, looked at me in sympathy without being able to help, he waitedat the door for a long time although it's more than I can understand whyhe was being so good, and then he went.  I, of course, was glad he'dgone, I'd been holding my breath all this time.  All this had even moreaffect on the lawyer lying there ill, when I took my leave of him, thegood man, he was quite unable to speak.  You have probably contributedto his total collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependenton closer to his death.  And me, your own uncle, you leave me here inthe rain - just feel this, I'm wet right through - waiting here forhours, sick with worry."



Chapter SevenLawyer - Manufacturer - Painter
One winter morning - snow was falling in the dull light outside -K. was sitting in his office, already extremely tired despite the earlyhour.  He had told the servitor he was engaged in a major piece of workand none of the junior staff should be allowed in to see him, so hewould not be disturbed by them at least.  But instead of working heturned round in his chair, slowly moved various items around his desk,but then, without being aware of it, he lay his arm stretched out on thedesk top and sat there immobile with his head sunk down on his chest.

He was no longer able to get the thought of the trial out of hishead.  He had often wondered whether it might not be a good idea to workout a written defence and hand it in to the court.  It would contain ashort description of his life and explain why he had acted the way hehad at each event that was in any way important, whether he nowconsidered he had acted well or ill, and his reasons for each.  Therewas no doubt of the advantages a written defence of this sort would haveover relying on the lawyer, who was anyway not without his shortcomings.
K. had no idea what actions the lawyer was taking; it was certainly nota lot, it was more than a month since the lawyer had summoned him, andnone of the previous discussions had given K. the impression that thisman would be able to do much for him.  Most importantly, he had askedhim hardly any questions.  And there were so many questions here to beasked.  Asking questions were the most important thing.  K. had thefeeling that he would be able to ask all the questions needed herehimself.  The lawyer, in contrast, did not ask questions but did all thetalking himself or sat silently facing him, leant forward slightly overthe desk, probably because he was hard of hearing, pulled on a strand ofhair in the middle of his beard and looked down at the carpet, perhapsat the very spot where K. had lain with Leni.  Now and then he wouldgive K. some vague warning of the sort you give to children.  Hisspeeches were as pointless as they were boring, and K. decided that whenthe final bill came he would pay not a penny for them.  Once the lawyerthought he had humiliated K. sufficiently, he usually started somethingthat would raise his spirits again.  He had already, he would then say,won many such cases, partly or in whole, cases which may not really havebeen as difficult as this one but which, on the face of it, had evenless hope of success.  He had a list of these cases here in the drawer -here he would tap on one or other of the drawers in his desk - butcould, unfortunately, not show them to K. as they dealt with officialsecrets.  Nonetheless, the great experience he had acquired through allthese cases would, of course, be of benefit to K.  He had, of course,begun work straight away and was nearly ready to submit the firstdocuments.  They would be very important because the first impressionmade by the defence will often determine the whole course of theproceedings.  Unfortunately, though, he would still have to make itclear to K. that the first documents submitted are sometimes not evenread by the court.  They simply put them with the other documents andpoint out that, for the time being, questioning and observing theaccused are much more important than anything written.  If the applicantbecomes insistent, then they add that before they come to any decision,as soon as all the material has been brought together, with due regard,of course, to all the documents, then these first documents to have beensubmitted will also be checked over.  But unfortunately, even this isnot usually true, the first documents submitted are usually mislaid orlost completely, and even if they do keep them right to the end they arehardly read, although the lawyer only knew about this from rumour.  Thisis all very regrettable, but not entirely without its justifications.
But K. should not forget that the trial would not be public, if thecourt deems it necessary it can be made public but there is no law thatsays it has to be.  As a result, the accused and his defence don't haveaccess even to the court records, and especially not to the indictment,and that means we generally don't know - or at least not precisely -what the first documents need to be about, which means that if they docontain anything of relevance to the case it's only by a luckycoincidence.  If anything about the individual charges and the reasonsfor them comes out clearly or can be guessed at while the accused isbeing questioned, then it's possible to work out and submit documentsthat really direct the issue and present proof, but not before.
Conditions like this, of course, place the defence in a veryunfavourable and difficult position.  But that is what they intend.  Infact, defence is not really allowed under the law, it's only tolerated,and there is even some dispute about whether the relevant parts of thelaw imply even that.  So strictly speaking, there is no such thing as acounsel acknowledged by the court, and anyone who comes before thiscourt as counsel is basically no more than a barrack room lawyer.  Theeffect of all this, of course, is to remove the dignity of the wholeprocedure, the next time K. is in the court offices he might like tohave a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he's seen it.  Hemight well be quite shocked by the people he sees assembled there.  Theroom they've been allocated, with its narrow space and low ceiling, willbe enough to show what contempt the court has for these people.  Theonly light in the room comes through a little window that is so high upthat, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of yourcolleagues to support you on his back, and even then the smoke from thechimney just in front of it will go up your nose and make your faceblack.  In the floor of this room - to give yet another example of theconditions there - there is a hole that's been there for more than ayear, it's not so big that a man could fall through, but it is bigenough for your foot to disappear through it.  The lawyers' room is onthe second floor of the attic; if your foot does go through it will hangdown into the first floor of the attic underneath it, and right in thecorridor where the litigants are waiting.  It's no exaggeration whenlawyers say that conditions like that are a disgrace.  Complaints to themanagement don't have the slightest effect, but the lawyers are strictlyforbidden to alter anything in the room at their own expense.  But eventreating the lawyers in this way has its reasons.  They want, as far aspossible, to prevent any kind of defence, everything should be made theresponsibility of the accused.  Not a bad point of view, basically, butnothing could be more mistaken than to think from that that lawyers arenot necessary for the accused in this court.  On the contrary, there isno court where they are less needed than here.  This is becauseproceedings are generally kept secret not only from the public but alsofrom the accused.  Only as far as that is possible, of course, but it ispossible to a very large extent.  And the accused doesn't get to see thecourt records either, and it's very difficult to infer what's in thecourt records from what's been said during questioning based on them,especially for the accused who is in a difficult situation and is facedwith every possible worry to distract him.  This is when the defencebegins.  Counsel for the defence are not normally allowed to be presentwhile the accused is being questioned, so afterwards, and if possiblestill at the door of the interview room, he has to learn what he canabout it from him and extract whatever he can that might be of use, eventhough what the accused has to report is often very confused.  But thatis not the most important thing, as there's really not a lot that can belearned in this way, although in this, as with anything else, acompetent man will learn more than another.  Nonetheless, the mostimportant thing is the lawyer's personal connections, that's where thereal value of taking counsel lies.  Now K. will most likely have alreadylearned from his own experience that, among its very lowest orders, thecourt organisation does have its imperfections, the court is strictlyclosed to the public, but staff who forget their duty or who take bribesdo, to some extent, show where the gaps are. This is where most lawyerswill push their way in, this is where bribes are paid and informationextracted, there have even, in earlier times at least, been incidentswhere documents have been stolen.  There's no denying that somesurprisingly favourable results have been attained for the accused inthis way, for a limited time, and these petty advocates then strut toand fro on the basis of them and attract new clients, but for thefurther course of the proceedings it signifies either nothing or nothinggood.  The only things of real value are honest personal contacts,contacts with higher officials, albeit higher officials of the lowergrades, you understand.  That is the only way the progress of the trialcan be influenced, hardly noticeable at first, it's true, but from thenon it becomes more and more visible.  There are, of course, not manylawyers who can do this, and K. has made a very good choice in thismatter.  There were probably no more than one or two who had as manycontacts as Dr. Huld, but they don't bother with the company of thelawyers' room and have nothing to do with it.  This means they have allthe less contact with the court officials.  It is not at all necessaryfor Dr. Huld to go to the court, wait in the ante-rooms for theexamining judges to turn up, if they turn up, and try to achievesomething which, according to the judges' mood is usually more apparentthan real and most often not even that.  No, K. has seen for himselfthat the court officials, including some who are quite high up, comeforward without being asked, are glad to give information which is fullyopen or at least easy to understand, they discuss the next stages in theproceedings, in fact in some cases they can be won over and are quitewilling to adopt the other person's point of view.  However, when thishappens, you should never trust them too far, as however firmly they mayhave declared this new point of view in favour of the defendant theymight well go straight back to their offices and write a report for thecourt that says just the opposite, and might well be even harder on thedefendant than the original view, the one they insist they've been fullydissuaded from.  And, of course, there's no way of defending yourselffrom this, something said in private is indeed in private and cannotthen be used in public, it's not something that makes it easy for thedefence to keep those gentlemen's favour.  On the other hand, it's alsotrue that the gentlemen don't become involved with the defence - whichwill of course be done with great expertise - just for philanthropicreasons or in order to be friendly, in some respects it would be truerto say that they, too, have it allocated to them.  This is where thedisadvantages of a court structure that, right from the start,stipulates that all proceedings take place in private, come into force.
In normal, mediocre trials its officials have contact with the public,and they're very well equipped for it, but here they don't; normaltrials run their course all by themselves, almost, and just need a nudgehere and there; but when they're faced with cases that are especiallydifficult they're as lost as they often are with ones that are verysimple; they're forced to spend all their time, day and night, withtheir laws, and so they don't have the right feel for humanrelationships, and that's a serious shortcoming in cases like this.
That's when they come for advice to the lawyer, with a servant behindthem carrying the documents which normally are kept so secret.  Youcould have seen many gentlemen at this window, gentlemen of whom youwould least expect it, staring out this window in despair on the streetbelow while the lawyer is at his desk studying the documents so that hecan give them good advice.  And at times like that it's also possible tosee how exceptionally seriously these gentlemen take their professionsand how they are thrown into great confusion by difficulties which it'sjust not in their natures to overcome.  But they're not in an easyposition, to regard their positions as easy would be to do them aninjustice.  The different ranks and hierarchies of the court areendless, and even someone who knows his way around them cannot alwaystell what's going to happen.  But even for the junior officials, theproceedings in the courtrooms are usually kept secret, so they arehardly able to see how the cases they work with proceed, court affairsappear in their range of vision often without their knowing where theycome from and they move on further without their learning where they go.
So civil servants like this are not able to learn the things you canlearn from studying the successive stages that individual trials gothrough, the final verdict or the reasons for it.  They're only allowedto deal with that part of the trial which the law allocates them, andthey usually know less about the results of their work after it's leftthem than the defence does, even though the defence will usually stay incontact with the accused until the trial is nearly at its end, so thatthe court officials can learn many useful things from the defence.
Bearing all this in mind, does it still surprise K. that the officialsare irritated and often express themselves about the litigants inunflattering ways - which is an experience shared by everyone.  All theofficials are irritated, even when they appear calm.  This causes manydifficulties for the junior advocates, of course.  There is a story, forinstance, that has very much the ring of truth about it.  It goes likethis: One of the older officials, a good and peaceful man, was dealingwith a difficult matter for the court which had become very confused,especially thanks to the contributions from the lawyers.  He had beenstudying it for a day and a night without a break - as these officialsare indeed hard working, no-one works as hard as they do.  When it wasnearly morning, and he had been working for twenty-four hours withprobably very little result, he went to the front entrance, waited therein ambush, and every time a lawyer tried to enter the building he wouldthrow him down the steps.  The lawyers gathered together down in frontof the steps and discussed with each other what they should do; on theone hand they had actually no right to be allowed into the building sothat there was hardly anything that they could legally do to theofficial and, as I've already mentioned, they would have to be carefulnot to set all the officials against them.  On the other hand, any daynot spent in court is a day lost for them and it was a matter of someimportance to force their way inside.  In the end, they agreed that theywould try to tire the old man out.  One lawyer after another was sentout to run up the steps and let himself be thrown down again, offeringwhat resistance he could as long as it was passive resistance, and hiscolleagues would catch him at the bottom of the steps.  That went on forabout an hour until the old gentleman, who was already exhausted fromworking all night, was very tired and went back to his office.  Thosewho were at the bottom of the steps could not believe it at first, sothey sent somebody out to go and look behind the door to see if therereally was no-one there, and only then did they all gather together andprobably didn't even dare to complain, as it's far from being thelawyers' job to introduce any improvements in the court system, or evento want to.  Even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationshipthere to some extent, but one significant point is that almost everydefendant, even very simple people, begins to think of suggestions forimproving the court as soon as his proceedings have begun, many of themoften even spend time and energy on the matter that could be spent farbetter elsewhere.  The only right thing to do is to learn how to dealwith the situation as it is.  Even if it were possible to improve anydetail of it - which is anyway no more than superstitious nonsense - thebest that they could achieve, although doing themselves incalculableharm in the process, is that they will have attracted the specialattention of the officials for any case that comes up in the future, andthe officials are always ready to seek revenge.  Never attract attentionto yourself!  Stay calm, however much it goes against your character!Try to gain some insight into the size of the court organism and how, tosome extent, it remains in a state of suspension, and that even if youalter something in one place you'll draw the ground out from under yourfeet and might fall, whereas if an enormous organism like the court isdisrupted in any one place it finds it easy to provide a substitute foritself somewhere else.  Everything is connected with everything else andwill continue without any change or else, which is quite probable, evenmore closed, more attentive, more strict, more malevolent.  So it's bestto leave the work to the lawyers and not to keep disturbing them.  Itdoesn't do much good to make accusations, especially if you can't makeit clear what they're based on and their full significance, but it mustbe said that K. caused a great deal of harm to his own case by hisbehaviour towards the office director, he was a very influential man butnow he might as well be struck off the list of those who might doanything for K.  If the trial is mentioned, even just in passing,  it'squite obvious that he's ignoring it.  These officials are in many waysjust like children.  Often, something quite harmless - although K.'sbehaviour could unfortunately not be called harmless - will leave themfeeling so offended that they will even stop talking with good friendsof theirs, they turn away when they see them and do everything they canto oppose them.  But then, with no particular reason, surprisinglyenough, some little joke that was only ever attempted because everythingseemed so hopeless will make them laugh and they'll be reconciled.
It's both difficult and hard at the same time to deal with them, andthere's hardly any reason for it.  It's sometimes quite astonishing thata single, average life is enough to encompass so much that it's at allpossible ever to have any success in one's work here.  On the otherhand, there are also dark moments, such as everyone has, when you thinkyou've achieved nothing at all, when it seems that the only trials tocome to a good end are those that were determined to have a good endfrom the start and would do so without any help, while all the othersare lost despite all the running to and fro, all the effort, all thelittle, apparent successes that gave such joy.  Then you no longer feelvery sure of anything and, if asked about a trial that was doing well byits own nature but which was turned for the worse because you assistedin it, would not even dare deny that.  And even that is a kind of self-confidence, but then it's the only one that's left.   Lawyers areespecially vulnerable to fits of depression of that sort - and they areno more than fits of depression of course - when a case is suddenlytaken out of their hands after they've been conducting it satisfactorilyfor some time.  That's probably the worst that can happen to a lawyer.
It's not that the accused takes the case away from him, that hardly everhappens, once a defendant has taken on a certain lawyer he has to staywith him whatever happens.  How could he ever carry on by himself afterhe's taken on help from a lawyer?  No, that just doesn't happen, butwhat does sometimes happen is that the trial takes on a course where thelawyer may not go along with it.  Client and trial are both simply takenaway from the lawyer; and then even contact with the court officialswon't help, however good they are, as they don't know anythingthemselves.  The trial will have entered a stage where no more help canbe given, where it's being processed in courts to which no-one has anyaccess, where the defendant cannot even be contacted by his lawyer.  Youcome home one day and find all the documents you've submitted, whichyou've worked hard to create and which you had the best hopes for, lyingon the desk, they've been sent back as they can't be carried through tothe next stage in the trial, they're just worthless scraps of paper.  Itdoesn't mean that the case has been lost, not at all, or at least thereis no decisive reason for supposing so, it's just that you don't knowanything more about the case and won't be told anything of what'shappening.  Well, cases like that are the exceptions, I'm glad to say,and even if K.'s trial is one of them, it's still, for the time being, along way off.  But there was still plenty of opportunity for lawyers toget to work, and K. could be sure they would be made use of.  As he hadsaid, the time for submitting documents was still in the future andthere was no rush to prepare them, it was much more important to startthe initial discussions with the appropriate officials, and they hadalready taken place.  With varying degrees of success, it must be said.
It was much better not to give away any details before their time, as inthat way K. could only be influenced unfavourably and his hopes might beraised or he might be made too anxious, better just to say that someindividuals have spoken very favourably and shown themselves verywilling to help, although others have spoken less favourably, but eventhey have not in any way refused to help.  So all in all, the resultsare very encouraging, only you should certainly not draw any particularconclusions as all preliminary proceedings begin in the same way and itwas only the way they developed further that would show what the valueof these preliminary proceedings has been.  Anyway, nothing has beenlost yet, and if we can succeed in getting the office director, despiteeverything, on our side - and several actions have been undertaken tothis end - then everything is a clean wound, as a surgeon would say, andwe can wait for the results with some comfort.

When he started talking on in this way the lawyer was quitetireless.  He went through it all again every time K. went to see him.
There was always some progress, but he could never be told what sort ofprogress it was.  The first set of documents to be submitted were beingworked on but still not ready, which usually turned out to be a greatadvantage the next time K. went to see him as the earlier occasion wouldhave been a very bad time to put them in, which they could not then haveknown.  If K., stupefied from all this talking, ever pointed out thateven considering all these difficulties progress was very slow, thelawyer would object that progress was not slow at all, but that theymight have progressed far further if K. had come to him at the righttime.  But he had come to him late and that lateness would bring stillfurther difficulties, and not only where time was concerned.  The onlywelcome interruption during these visits was always when Leni contrivedto bring the lawyer his tea while K. was there.  Then she would standbehind K. - pretending to watch the lawyer as he bent greedily over hiscup, poured the tea in and drank - and secretly let K. hold her hand.
There was always complete silence.  The lawyer drank.  K. squeezedLeni's hand and Leni would sometimes dare to gently stroke K.'s hair.
"Still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he was ready.  "Iwanted to take the dishes away," said Leni, they would give each other'shands a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe his mouth and then starttalking at K. again with renewed energy.

Was the lawyer trying to comfort K. or to confuse him?  K. couldnot tell, but it seemed clear to him that his defence was not in goodhands.  Maybe everything the lawyer said was quite right, even though heobviously wanted to make himself as conspicuous as possible and probablyhad never even taken on a case as important as he said K.'s was.  But itwas still suspicious how he continually mentioned his personal contactswith the civil servants.  Were they to be exploited solely for K.'sbenefit?  The lawyer never forgot to mention that they were dealing onlywith junior officials, which meant officials who were dependent onothers, and the direction taken in each trial could be important fortheir own furtherment.  Could it be that they were making use of thelawyer to turn trials in a certain direction, which would, of course,always be at the cost of the defendant?  It certainly did not mean thatthey would do that in every trial, that was not likely at all, and therewere probably also trials where they gave the lawyer advantages and allthe room he needed to turn it in the direction he wanted, as it wouldalso be to their advantage to keep his reputation intact.  If thatreally was their relationship, how would they direct K.'s trial which,as the lawyer had explained, was especially difficult and thereforeimportant enough to attract great attention from the very first time itcame to court?  There could not be much doubt about what they would do.
The first signs of it could already be seen in the fact that the firstdocuments still had not been submitted even though the trial had alreadylasted several months, and that, according to the lawyer, everything wasstill in its initial stages, which was very effective, of course, inmaking the defendant passive and keeping him helpless.  Then he could besuddenly surprised with the verdict, or at least with a notificationthat the hearing had not decided in his favour and the matter would bepassed on to a higher office.

It was essential that K. take a hand in it himself.  On winter'smornings such as this, when he was very tired and everything draggeditself lethargically through his head, this belief of his seemedirrefutable.  He no longer felt the contempt for the trial that he hadhad earlier.  If he had been alone in the world it would have been easyfor him to ignore it, although it was also certain that, in that case,the trial would never have arisen in the first place.  But now, hisuncle had already dragged him to see the lawyer, he had to take accountof his family; his job was no longer totally separate from the progressof the trial, he himself had carelessly - with a certain, inexplicablecomplacency - mentioned it to acquaintances and others had learned aboutit in ways he did not know, his relationship with Miss Bürstner seemedto be in trouble because of it.  In short, he no longer had any choicewhether he would accept the trial or turn it down, he was in the middleof it and had to defend himself.  If he was tired, then that was bad.

But there was no reason to worry too much before he needed to.  Hehad been capable of working himself up to his high position in the bankin a relatively short time and to retain it with respect from everyone,now he simply had to apply some of the talents that had made thatpossible for him to the trial, and there was no doubt that it had toturn out well.  The most important thing, if something was to beachieved, was to reject in advance any idea that he might be in any wayguilty.  There was no guilt.  The trial was nothing but a big piece ofbusiness, just like he had already concluded to the benefit of the bankmany times, a piece of business that concealed many lurking dangerswaiting in ambush for him, as they usually did, and these dangers wouldneed to be defended against.  If that was to be achieved then he mustnot entertain any idea of guilt, whatever he did, he would need to lookafter his own interests as closely as he could.  Seen in this way, therewas no choice but to take his representation away from the lawyer verysoon, at best that very evening.  The lawyer had told him, as he talkedto him, that that was something unheard of and would probably do him agreat deal of harm, but K. could not tolerate any impediment to hisefforts where his trial was concerned, and these impediments wereprobably caused by the lawyer himself.  But once he had shaken off thelawyer the documents would need to be submitted straight away and, ifpossible, he would need to see to it that they were being dealt withevery day.  It would of course not be enough, if that was to be done,for K. to sit in the corridor with his hat under the bench like theothers.  Day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebody elseon his behalf, would have to run after the officials and force them tosit at their desks and study K.'s documents instead of looking out onthe corridor through the grating.  There could be no let-up in theseefforts, everything would need to be organised and supervised, it wasabout time that the court came up against a defendant who knew how todefend and make use of his rights.

But when K. had the confidence to try and do all this thedifficulty of composing the documents was too much for him.  Earlier,just a week or so before, he could only have felt shame at the thoughtof being made to write out such documents himself;  it had never enteredhis head that the task could also be difficult.  He remembered onemorning when, already piled up with work, he suddenly shoved everythingto one side and took a pad of paper on which he sketched out some of histhoughts on how documents of this sort should proceed.  Perhaps he wouldoffer them to that slow-witted lawyer, but just then the door of themanager's office opened and the deputy-director entered the room with aloud laugh.  K. was very embarrassed, although the deputy-director, ofcourse, was not laughing at K.'s documents, which he knew nothing about,but at a joke he had just heard about the stock-exchange, a joke whichneeded an illustration if it was to be understood, and now the deputy-director leant over K.'s desk, took his pencil from his hand, and drewthe illustration on the writing pad that K. had intended for his ideasabout his case.

K. now had no more thoughts of shame, the documents had to beprepared and submitted.  If, as was very likely, he could find no timeto do it in the office he would have to do it at home at night.  If thenights weren't enough he would have to take a holiday.  Above all, he couldnot stop half way, that was nonsense not only in business but always andeverywhere.  Needless to say, the documents would mean an almost endlessamount of work.  It was easy to come to the belief, not only for thoseof an anxious disposition, that it was impossible ever to finish it.
This was not because of laziness or deceit, which were the only thingsthat might have hindered the lawyer in preparing it, but because he didnot know what the charge was or even what consequences it might bring,so that he had to remember every tiny action and event from the whole ofhis life, looking at them from all sides and checking and reconsideringthem.  It was also a very disheartening job.  It would have been moresuitable as a way of passing the long days after he had retired andbecome senile.  But now, just when K. needed to apply all his thoughtsto his work, when he was still rising and already posed a threat to thedeputy-director, when every hour passed so quickly and he wanted toenjoy the brief evenings and nights as a young man, this was the time hehad to start working out these documents.  Once more, he began to feelresentment.  Almost involuntarily, only to put an end to it, his fingerfelt for the button of the electric bell in the ante-room.  As hepressed it he glanced up to the clock.  It was eleven o'clock, twohours, he had spent a great deal of his costly time just dreaming andhis wits were, of course, even more dulled than they had been before.
But the time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to somedecisions that could be of value.  As well as various pieces of mail,the servitors brought two visiting cards from gentlemen who had alreadybeen waiting for K. for some time.  They were actually very importantclients of the bank who should not really have been kept waiting underany circumstances.  Why had they come at such an awkward time, and why,the gentlemen on the other side of the closed door seemed to be asking,was the industrious K. using up the best business time for his privateaffairs?  Tired from what had gone before, and tired in anticipation ofwhat was to follow, K. stood up to receive the first of them.

He was a short, jolly man, a manufacturer who K. knew well.  Heapologised for disturbing K. at some important work, and K., for hispart, apologised for having kept the manufacturer waiting for so long.
But even this apology was spoken in such a mechanical way and with suchfalse intonation that the manufacturer would certainly have noticed ifhe had not been fully preoccupied with his business affairs.  Instead,he hurriedly pulled calculations and tables out from all his pockets,spread them out in front of K., explained several items, corrected alittle mistake in the arithmetic that he noticed as he quickly glancedover it all, and reminded K. of a similar piece of business he'dconcluded with him about a year before, mentioning in passing that thistime there was another bank  spending great effort to get his business,and finally stopped speaking in order to learn K.'s opinion on thematter.  And K. had indeed, at first, been closely following what themanufacturer was saying, he too was aware of how important the deal was,but unfortunately it did not last, he soon stopped listening, nodded ateach of the manufacturer's louder exclamations for a short while, buteventually he stopped doing even that and did no more than stare at thebald head bent over the papers, asking himself when the manufacturerwould finally realise that everything he was saying was useless.  Whenhe did stop talking, K. really thought at first that this was so that hewould have the chance to confess that he was incapable of listening.
Instead, seeing the anticipation on the manufacturer's face, obviouslyready to counter any objections made, he was sorry to realise that thebusiness discussion had to be continued.  So he bent his head as if he'dbeen given an order and began slowly to move his pencil over the papers,now and then he would stop and stare at one of the figures.  Themanufacturer thought there must be some objection, perhaps his figuresweren't really sound, perhaps they weren't the decisive issue, whateverhe thought, the manufacturer covered the papers with his hand and beganonce again, moving very close to K., to explain what the deal was allabout.  "It is difficult," said K., pursing his lips. The only thingthat could offer him any guidance were the papers, and the manufacturerhad covered them from his view, so he just sank back against the arm ofthe chair.  Even when the door of the manager's office opened andrevealed not very clearly, as if through a veil, the deputy director, hedid no more than look up weakly.  K. thought no more about the matter,he merely watched the immediate effect of the deputy director'sappearance and, for him, the effect was very pleasing;  the manufacturerimmediately jumped up from his seat and hurried over to meet the deputydirector, although K. would have liked to make him ten times livelier ashe feared the deputy director might disappear again.  He need not haveworried, the two gentlemen met each other, shook each other's hand andwent together over to K.'s desk.  The manufacturer said he was sorry tofind the chief clerk so little inclined to do business, pointing to K.
who, under the view of the deputy director, had bent back down over thepapers.  As the two men leant over the desk and the manufacturer madesome effort to gain and keep the deputy director's attention, K. felt asif they were much bigger than they really were and that theirnegotiations were about him.  Carefully and slowly turning his eyesupwards, he tried to learn what was taking place above him, took one ofthe papers from his desk without looking to see what it was, lay it onthe flat of his hand and raised it slowly up as he rose up to the levelof the two men himself.  He had no particular plan in mind as he didthis, but merely felt this was how he would act if only he had finishedpreparing that great document that was to remove his burden entirely.
The deputy director had been paying all his attention to theconversation and did no more than glance at the paper, he did not readwhat was written on it at all as what was important for the chief clerkwas not important for him, he took it from K.'s hand saying, "Thank you,I'm already familiar with everything", and lay it calmly back on thedesk.  K. gave him a bitter, sideways look.  But the deputy director didnot notice this at all, or if he did notice it it only raised hisspirits, he frequently laughed out loud, one time he clearly embarrassedthe manufacturer when he raised an objection in a witty way but drew himimmediately back out of his embarrassment by commenting adversely onhimself, and finally invited him into his office where they could bringthe matter to its conclusion.  "It's a very important matter," said themanufacturer.  "I understand that completely.  And I'm sure the chiefclerk ..." - even as he said this he was actually speaking only to themanufacturer - "will be very glad to have us take it off his hands.
This is something that needs calm consideration.  But he seems to beover-burdened today, there are even some people in the room outsidewho've been waiting there for hours for him."  K. still had enoughcontrol of himself to turn away from the deputy director and direct hisfriendly, albeit stiff, smile only at the manufacturer, he made no otherretaliation, bent down slightly and supported himself with both hands onhis desk like a clerk, and watched as the two gentlemen, still talking,took the papers from his desk and disappeared into the manager's office.
In the doorway, the manufacturer turned and said he wouldn't make hisfarewell with K. just yet, he would of course let the chief clerk knowabout the success of his discussions but he also had a little somethingto tell him about.

At last, K. was by himself.  It did not enter his head to showanyone else into his office and only became vaguely aware of how nice itwas that the people outside thought he was still negotiating with themanufacturer and, for this reason, he could not let anyone in to seehim, not even the servitor.  He went over to the window, sat down on theledge beside it, held firmly on to the handle and looked down onto thesquare outside.  The snow was still falling, the weather still had notbrightened up at all.

He remained a long time sitting in this way, not knowing what itactually was that made him so anxious, only occasionally did he glance,slightly startled, over his shoulder at the door to the outer roomwhere, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise.  No-one came, andthat made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rinsed hisface with cold water and, his head somewhat clearer, went back to hisplace by the window.  The decision to take his defence into his ownhands now seemed more of a burden than he had originally assumed.  Allthe while he had left his defence up to the lawyer his trial had hadlittle basic affect on him, he had observed it from afar as somethingthat was scarcely able to reach him directly, when it suited him helooked to see how things stood but he was also able to draw his headback again whenever he wanted.  Now, in contrast, if he was to conducthis defence himself, he would have to devote himself entirely to thecourt - for the time being, at least - success would mean, later on, hiscomplete and conclusive liberation, but if he was to achieve this hewould have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger thanhe had been in so far.  If he ever felt tempted to doubt this, then hisexperience with the deputy director and the manufacturer that day wouldbe quite enough to convince him of it.  How could he have sat theretotally convinced of the need to do his own defence?  How would it belater?  What would his life be like in the days ahead?  Would he findthe way through it all to a happy conclusion?  Did a carefully workedout defence - and any other sort would have made no sense - did acarefully worked out defence not also mean he would need to shut himselfoff from everything else as much as he could?  Would he survive that?And how was he to succeed in conducting all this at the bank?  Itinvolved much more than just submitting some documents that he couldprobably prepare in a few days' leave, although it would have been greattemerity to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it was awhole trial and there was no way of seeing how long it might last.  Thiswas an enormous difficulty that had suddenly been thrown into K.'s life!
And was he supposed to be doing the bank's work at a time likethis?  He looked down at his desk.  Was he supposed to let people in tosee him and go into negotiations with them at a time like this?  Whilehis trial trundled on, while the court officials upstairs in the atticroom sat looking at the papers for this trial, should he be worryingabout the business of the bank?  Did this not seem like a kind oftorture, acknowledged by the court, connected with the trial and whichfollowed him around?  And is it likely that anyone in the bank, whenjudging his work, would take any account of his peculiar situation?  No-one and never.  There were those who knew about his trial, although itwas not quite clear who knew about it or how much.  But he hoped rumourshad not reached as far as the deputy director, otherwise he wouldobviously soon find a way of making use of it to harm K., he would showneither comradeship nor humaneness.  And what about the director?  Itwas true that he was well disposed towards K., and as soon as he heardabout the trial he would probably try to do everything he could to makeit easier for him, but he would certainly not devote himself to it.  K.
at one time had provided the counter-balance to what the deputy directorsaid but the director was now coming more and more under his influence,and the deputy director would also exploit the weakened condition of thedirector to strengthen his own power.  So what could K. hope for?  Maybeconsiderations of this sort weakened his power of resistance, but it wasstill necessary not to deceive oneself and to see everything as clearlyas it could be seen at that moment.

For no particular reason, just to avoiding returning to his deskfor a while, he opened the window.  It was difficult to open and he hadto turn the handle with both his hands.  Then, through the whole heightand breadth of the window, the mixture of fog and smoke was drawn intothe room, filling it with a slight smell of burning.  A few flakes ofsnow were blown in with it.  "It's a horrible autumn," said themanufacturer, who had come into the room unnoticed after seeing thedeputy director and now stood behind K.  K. nodded and looked uneasilyat the manufacturer's briefcase, from which he would now probably takethe papers and inform K. of the result of his negotiations with thedeputy director.  However, the manufacturer saw where K. was looking,knocked on his briefcase and without opening it said, "You'll be wantingto hear how things turned out.  I've already got the contract in mypocket, almost.  He's a charming man, your deputy director - he's gothis dangers, though."  He laughed as he shook K.'s hand and wanted tomake him laugh with him.  But to K., it once more seemed suspicious thatthe manufacturer did not want to show him the papers and saw nothingabout his comments to laugh at.  "Chief clerk," said the manufacturer,"I expect the weather's been affecting your mood, has it? You're lookingso worried today."   "Yes," said K., raising his hand and holding thetemple of his head, "headaches, worries in the family."  "Quite right,"said the manufacturer, who was always in a hurry and could never listento anyone for very long, "everyone has his cross to bear."  K. hadunconsciously made a step towards the door as if wanting to show themanufacturer out, but the manufacturer said, "Chief clerk, there'ssomething else I'd like to mention to you.  I'm very sorry if it'ssomething that'll be a burden to you today of all days but I've been tosee you twice already, lately, and each time I forgot all about it.  IfI delay it any longer it might well lose its point altogether.  Thatwould be a pity, as I think what I've got to say does have some value."Before K. had had the time to answer, the manufacturer came up close tohim, tapped his knuckle lightly on his chest and said quietly, "You'vegot a trial going on, haven't you?"  K. stepped back and immediatelyexclaimed, "That's what the deputy director's been telling you!"  "No,no," said the manufacturer, "how would the deputy director know aboutit?"  "And what about you?" asked K., already more in control ofhimself.  "I hear things about the court here and there," said themanufacturer, "and that even applies to what it is that I wanted to tellyou about."  "There are so many people who have connections with thecourt!" said K. with lowered head, and he led the manufacturer over tohis desk.  They sat down where they had been before, and themanufacturer said, "I'm afraid it's not very much that I've got to tellyou about.  Only, in matters like this, it's best not to overlook thetiniest details.  Besides, I really want to help you in some way,however modest my help might be.  We've been good business partners uptill now, haven't we?  Well then."  K. wanted to apologise for hisbehaviour in the conversation earlier that day, but the manufacturerwould tolerate no interruption, shoved his briefcase up high in hisarmpit to show that he was in a hurry, and carried on.  "I know aboutyour case through a certain Titorelli.  He's a painter, Titorelli's justhis artistic name, I don't even know what his real name is.  He's beencoming to me in my office for years from time to time, and brings littlepictures with him which I buy more or less just for the sake of charityas he's hardly more than a beggar.  And they're nice pictures, too,moorland landscapes and that sort of thing.  We'd both got used to doingbusiness in this way and it always went smoothly.  Only, one time thesevisits became a bit too frequent, I began to tell him off for it, westarted talking and I became interested how it was that he could earn aliving just by painting, and then I learned to my amazement that hismain source of income was painting portraits.  'I work for the court,'he said, 'what court?' said I.  And that's when he told me about thecourt.  I'm sure you can imagine how amazed I was at being told allthis.  Ever since then I learn something new about the court every timehe comes to visit, and so little by little I get to understand somethingof how it works.  Anyway, Titorelli talks a lot and I often have to pushhim away, not only because he's bound to be lying but also, most of all,because a businessman like me who's already close to breaking pointunder the weight of his own business worries can't pay too muchattention to other people's.  But all that's just by the by.  Perhaps -this is what I've been thinking - perhaps Titorelli might be able tohelp you in some small way, he knows lots of judges and even if he can'thave much influence himself he can give you some advice about how to getsome influential people on your side.  And even if this advice doesn'tturn out to make all the difference I still think it'll be veryimportant once you've got it.  You're nearly a lawyer yourself.  That'swhat I always say, Mr. K. the chief clerk is nearly a lawyer.  Oh I'msure this trial of yours will turn out all right.  So do you want to goand see Titorelli, then?  If I ask him to he'll certainly do everythinghe possibly can.  I really do think you ought to go.  It needn't betoday, of course, just some time, when you get the chance.  And anyway -I want to tell you this too -  you don't actually have to go and seeTitorelli, this advice from me doesn't place you under any obligation atall.  No, if you think you can get by without Titorelli it'll certainlybe better to leave him completely out of it.  Maybe you've already got aclear idea of what you're doing and Titorelli could upset your plans.
No, if that's the case then of course you shouldn't go there under anycircumstances!  And it certainly won't be easy to take advice from a ladlike that.  Still, it's up to you.  Here's the letter of recommendationand here's the address."
Disappointed, K. took the letter and put it in his pocket.  Evenat best, the advantage he might derive from this recommendation wasincomparably smaller than the damage that lay in the fact of themanufacturer knowing about his trial, and that the painter was spreadingthe news about.  It was all he could manage to give the manufacturer, whowas already on his way to the door, a few words of thanks.  "I'll gothere," he said as he took his leave of the manufacturer at the door,"or, as I'm very busy at present, I'll write to him, perhaps he wouldlike to come to me in my office some time."  "I was sure you'd find thebest solution," said the manufacturer.  "Although I had thought you'dprefer to avoid inviting people like this Titorelli to the bank andtalking about the trial here.  And it's not always a good idea to sendletters to people like Titorelli, you don't know what might happen tothem.  But you're bound to have thought everything through and you knowwhat you can and can't do."  K. nodded and accompanied the manufactureron through the ante-room.  But despite seeming calm on the outside hewas actually very shocked; he had told the manufacturer he would writeto Titorelli only to show him in some way that he valued hisrecommendations and would consider the opportunity to speak withTitorelli without delay, but if he had thought Titorelli could offer anyworthwhile assistance he would not have delayed.  But it was only themanufacturer's comment that made K. realise what dangers that could leadto.  Was he really able to rely on his own understanding so little?  Ifit was possible that he might invite a questionable character into thebank with a clear letter, and ask advice from him about his trial,separated from the deputy director by no more than a door, was it notpossible or even very likely that there were also other dangers he hadfailed to see or that he was even running towards?  There was not alwayssomeone beside him to warn him.  And just now, just when he would haveto act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubts ofa sort he had never before known had presented themselves and affectedhis own vigilance!  The difficulties he had been feeling in carrying outhis office work; were they now going to affect the trial too?  Now, atleast, he found himself quite unable to understand how he could haveintended to write to Titorelli and invite him into the bank.

He shook his head at the thought of it once more as the servitorcame up beside him and drew his attention to the three gentlemen whowere waiting on a bench in the ante-room.  They had already been waitingto see K. for a long time.  Now that the servitor was speaking with K.
they had stood up and each of them wanted to make use of the opportunityto see K. before the others.  It had been negligent of the bank to letthem waste their time here in the waiting room, but none of them wantedto draw attention to this.  "Mr. K., ..." one of them was saying, but K.
had told the servitor to fetch his winter coat and said to the three ofthem, as the servitor helped him to put it on, "Please forgive me,gentlemen, I'm afraid I have no time to see you at present.  Please doforgive me but I have some urgent business to settle and have to leavestraight away.  You've already seen yourselves how long I've beendelayed.  Would you be so kind as to come back tomorrow or some time?Or perhaps we could settle your affairs by telephone?  Or perhaps youwould like to tell me now, briefly, what it's about and I can then giveyou a full answer in writing.  Whatever, the best thing will be for youto come here again."   The gentlemen now saw that their wait had beentotally pointless, and these suggestions of K.'s left them so astoundedthat they looked at each other without a word.  "That's agreed then, isit?" asked K., who had turned toward the servitor bringing him his hat.
Through the open door of K.'s office they could see that the snowfalloutside had become much heavier.  So K. turned the collar of his coat upand buttoned it up high under his chin.  Just then the deputy directorcame out of the adjoining room, smiled as he saw K. negotiating with thegentlemen in his winter coat, and asked, "Are you about to go out?""Yes," said K., standing more upright, "I have to go out on somebusiness."  But the deputy director had already turned towards thegentlemen.  "And what about these gentlemen?" he asked.  "I thinkthey've already been waiting quite a long time."  "We've already come toan understanding," said K.  But now the gentlemen could be held back nolonger, they surrounded K. and explained that they would not have beenwaiting for hours if it had not been about something important that hadto be discussed now, at length and in private.  The deputy directorlistened to them for a short while, he also looked at K. as he held hishat in his hand cleaning the dust off it here and there, and then hesaid, "Gentlemen, there is a very simple way to solve this.  If youwould prefer it, I'll be very glad to take over these negotiationsinstead of the chief clerk.  Your business does, of course, need to bediscussed without delay.  We are businessmen like yourselves and knowthe value of a businessman's time.  Would you like to come this way?"And he opened the door leading to the ante-room of his own office.

The deputy director seemed very good at appropriating everythingthat K. was now forced to give up!  But was K. not giving up more thanhe absolutely had to?  By running off to some unknown painter, with, ashe had to admit, very little hope of any vague benefit, his renown wassuffering damage that could not be repaired.  It would probably be muchbetter to take off his winter coat again and, at the very least, try towin back the two gentlemen who were certainly still waiting in the nextroom.  If K. had not then glimpsed the deputy director in his office,looking for something from his bookshelves as if they were his own, hewould probably even have made the attempt.  As K., somewhat agitated,approached the door the deputy director called out, "Oh, you've stillnot left!"  He turned his face toward him - its many deep folds seemedto show strength rather than age - and immediately began once more tosearch.  "I'm looking for a copy of a contract," he said, "which thisgentleman  insists you must have.  Could you help me look for it, do youthink?"  K. made a step forward, but the deputy director said, "thankyou, I've already found it," and with a big package of papers, whichcertainly must have included many more documents than just the copy ofthe contract, he turned and went back into his own office.

"I can't deal with him right now," K. said to himself, "but oncemy personal difficulties have been settled, then he'll certainly be thefirst to get the effect of it, and he certainly won't like it."Slightly calmed by these thoughts, K. gave the servitor, who had alreadylong been holding the door to the corridor open for him, the task oftelling the director, when he was able, that K. was going out of thebank on a business matter.  As he left the bank he felt almost happy atthe thought of being able to devote more of himself to his own businessfor a while.

He went straight to the painter, who lived in an outlying part oftown which was very near to the court offices, although this area waseven poorer, the houses were darker, the streets were full of dirt thatslowly blew about over the half-melted snow.   In the great gateway tothe building where the painter lived only one of the two doors was open,a hole had been broken open in the wall by the other door, and as K.
approached it a repulsive, yellow, steaming liquid shot out causing somerats to scurry away into the nearby canal.  Down by the staircase therewas a small child lying on its belly crying, but it could hardly beheard because of the noise from a metal-workshop on the other side ofthe entrance hall, drowning out any other sound.  The door to theworkshop was open, three workers stood in a circle around some piece ofwork that they were beating with hammers.  A large tin plate hung on thewall, casting a pale light that pushed its way in between two of theworkers, lighting up their faces and their work-aprons.  K. did no morethan glance at any of these things, he wanted to get things over withhere as soon as possible, to exchange just a few words to find out howthings stood with the painter and go straight back to the bank.  Even ifhe had just some tiny success here it would still have a good effect onhis work at the bank for that day.  On the third floor he had to slowdown his pace, he was quite out of breath - the steps, just like theheight of each floor, were much higher than they needed to be and he'dbeen told that the painter lived right up in the attic.  The air wasalso quite oppressive, there was no proper stairwell and the narrowsteps were closed in by walls on both sides with no more than a small,high window here and there.  Just as K. paused for a while some younggirls ran out of one of the flats and rushed higher up the stairs,laughing.  K. followed them slowly, caught up with one of the girls whohad stumbled and been left behind by the others, and asked her as theywent up side by side, "Is there a painter, Titorelli, who lives here?"The girl, hardly thirteen years old and somewhat hunchbacked, jabbed himwith her elbow and looked at him sideways.  Her youth and her bodilydefects had done nothing to stop her being already quite depraved.  Shedid not smile once, but looked at K. earnestly, with sharp, acquisitiveeyes.  K. pretended not to notice her behaviour and asked, "Do you knowTitorelli, the painter?"  She nodded and asked in reply,  "What d'youwant to see him for?"  K. thought it would be to his advantage quicklyto find out something more about Titorelli.  "I want to have him paintmy portrait," he said.  "Paint your portrait?" she asked, opening hermouth too wide and lightly hitting K. with her hand as if he had saidsomething extraordinarily surprising or clumsy, with both hands shelifted her skirt, which was already very short, and, as fast as shecould, she ran off after the other girls whose indistinct shouts lostthemselves in the heights.  At the next turn of the stairs, however, K.
encountered all the girls once more.  The hunchbacked girl had clearlytold them about K.'s intentions and they were waiting for him.  Theystood on both sides of the stairs, pressing themselves against the wallso that K. could get through between them, and smoothed their apronsdown with their hands.  All their faces, even in this guard of honour,showed a mixture of childishness and depravity.  Up at the head of theline of girls, who now, laughing, began to close in around K., was thehunchback who had taken on the role of leader.  It was thanks to herthat K. found the right direction without delay - he would havecontinued up the stairs straight in front of him, but she showed himthat to reach Titorelli he would need to turn off to one side.
The steps that led up to the painter were especially narrow, very longwithout any turning, the whole length could be seen in one glance and,at the top, at Titorelli's closed door, it came to its end.   This doorwas much better illuminated than the rest of the stairway by the lightfrom a small skylight set obliquely above it, it had been put togetherfrom unpainted planks of wood and the name 'Titorelli' was painted on itin broad, red brushstrokes.  K. was no more than half way up the steps,accompanied by his retinue of girls, when, clearly the result of thenoise of all those footsteps, the door opened slightly and in the cracka man who seemed to be dressed in just his nightshirt appeared.  "Oh!"he cried, when he saw the approaching crowd, and vanished.  Thehunchbacked girl clapped her hands in glee and the other girls crowdedin behind K. to push him faster forward.

They still had not arrived at the top, however, when the painterup above them suddenly pulled the door wide open and, with a deep bow,invited K. to enter.  The girls, on the other hand, he tried to keepaway, he did not want to let any of them in however much they begged himand however much they tried to get in - if they could not get in withhis permission they would try to force their way in against his will.
The only one to succeed was the hunchback when she slipped through underhis outstretched arm, but the painter chased after her, grabbed her bythe skirt, span her once round and set her down again by the door withthe other girls who, unlike the first, had not dared to cross thedoorstep while the painter had left his post.   K. did not know what hewas to make of all this, as they all seemed to be having fun.  Onebehind the other, the girls by the door stretched their necks up highand called out various words to the painter which were meant in jest butwhich K. did not understand, and even the painter laughed as thehunchback whirled round in his hand.  Then he shut the door, bowed oncemore to K., offered him his hand and introduced himself, saying,"Titorelli, painter".  K. pointed to the door, behind which the girlswere whispering, and said, "You seem to be very popular in thisbuilding."  "Ach, those brats!" said the painter, trying in vain tofasten his nightshirt at the neck.  He was also bare-footed and, apartfrom that, was wearing nothing more than a loose pair of yellowish linentrousers held up with a belt whose free end whipped to and fro.  "Thosekids are a real burden for me," he continued.  The top button of hisnightshirt came off and he gave up trying to fasten it, fetched a chairfor K. and made him sit down on it.  "I painted one of them once - she'snot here today - and ever since then they've been following me about.
If I'm here they only come in when I allow it, but as soon as I've goneout there's always at least one of them in here.  They had a key made tomy door and lend it round to each other.  It's hard to imagine what apain that is.  Suppose I come back home with a lady I'm going to paint,I open the door with my own key and find the hunchback there orsomething, by the table painting her lips red with my paintbrush, andmeanwhile her little sisters will be keeping guard for her, moving aboutand causing chaos in every corner of the room.  Or else, like happenedyesterday, I might come back home late in the evening - please forgivemy appearance and the room being in a mess, it is to do with them - so,I might come home late in the evening and want to go to bed, then I feelsomething pinching my leg, look under the bed and pull another of themout from under it.  I don't know why it is they bother me like this, Iexpect you've just seen that I do nothing to encourage them to come nearme.  And they make it hard for me to do my work too, of course.  If Ididn't get this studio for nothing I'd have moved out a long time ago."Just then, a little voice, tender and anxious, called out from under thedoor, "Titorelli, can we come in now?"  "No," answered the painter.
"Not even just me, by myself?" the voice asked again.  "Not even justyou," said the painter, as he went to the door and locked it.

Meanwhile, K. had been looking round the room, if it had not beenpointed out it would never have occurred to him that this wretchedlittle room could be called a studio.  It was hardly long enough orbroad enough to make two steps.  Everything, floor, walls and ceiling,was made of wood, between the planks narrow gaps could be seen.  Acrossfrom where K. was, the bed stood against the wall under a covering ofmany different colours.  In the middle of the room a picture stood on aneasel, covered over with a shirt whose arms dangled down to the ground.
Behind K. was the window through which the fog made it impossible to seefurther than the snow covered roof of the neighbouring building.

The turning of the key in the lock reminded K. that he had notwanted to stay too long.  So he drew the manufacturer's letter out fromhis pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I learned about youfrom this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on  his advicethat I've come here".  The painter glanced through the letter and threwit down onto the bed.  If the manufacturer had not said very clearlythat Titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man who was dependenton his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believethat Titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not rememberhim.  This impression was augmented by the painter's asking, "Were youwanting to buy some pictures or did you want to have yourself painted?"K. looked at the painter in astonishment.  What did the letter actuallysay?  K. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer hadexplained to the painter in his letter that K. wanted nothing more withhim than to find out more about his trial.  He had been far too rash incoming here!  But now he had to give the painter some sort of answerand, glancing at the easel, said, "Are you working on a picturecurrently?"  "Yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging overthe easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter.  "It's a portrait.
Quite a good piece of work, although it's not quite finished yet."  Thiswas a convenient coincidence for K., it gave him a good opportunity totalk about the court as the picture showed, very clearly, a judge.
What's more, it was remarkably similar to the picture in the lawyer'soffice, although this one showed a quite different judge, a heavy manwith a full beard which was black and bushy and extended to the sidesfar up the man's cheeks.  The lawyer's picture was also an oil painting,whereas this one had been made with pastel colours and was pale andunclear.  But everything else about the picture was similar, as thisjudge, too, was holding tightly to the arm of his throne and seemedominously about to rise from it.  At first K. was about to say, "Hecertainly is a judge," but he held himself back for the time being andwent closer to the picture as if he wanted to study it in detail.  Therewas a large figure shown in middle of the throne's back rest which K.
could not understand and asked the painter about it.  That'll need somemore work done on it, the painter told him, and taking a pastel crayonfrom a small table he added a few strokes to the edges of the figure butwithout making it any clearer as far as K. could make out.  "That's thefigure of justice," said the painter, finally.  "Now I see," said K.,"here's the blindfold and here are the scales.  But aren't those wingson her heels, and isn't she moving?"  "Yes," said the painter, "I had topaint it like that according to the contract.  It's actually the figureof justice and the goddess of victory all in one."  "That is not a goodcombination," said K. with a smile.  "Justice needs to remain still,otherwise the scales will move about and it won't be possible to make ajust verdict."  "I'm just doing what the client wanted," said thepainter.  "Yes, certainly," said K., who had not meant to criticiseanyone by that comment.  "You've painted the figure as it actuallyappears on the throne."  "No,"  said the painter, "I've never seen thatfigure or that throne, it's all just invention, but they told me what itwas I had to paint."  "How's that?" asked K. pretending not fully tounderstand what the painter said.  "That is a judge sitting on thejudge's chair, isn't it?"  "Yes," said the painter, "but that judgeisn't very high up and he's never sat on any throne like that."  "And hehas himself painted in such a grand pose?  He's sitting there just likethe president of the court."  "Yeah, gentlemen like this are very vain,"said the painter.  "But they have permission from higher up to getthemselves painted like this.  It's laid down quite strictly just whatsort of portrait each of them can get for himself.  Only it's a pitythat you can't make out the details of his costume and pose in thispicture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people likethis."  "Yes," said K., "it does seem odd that it's in pastel colours.""That's what the judge wanted," said the painter, "it's meant to be fora woman."  The sight of the picture seemed to make him feel likeworking, he rolled up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons,and K. watched as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judgeunder their quivering tips and radiated out the to edges of the picture.
This shadow play slowly surrounded the head like a decoration or loftydistinction.  But around the figure of Justice, apart from somecoloration that was barely noticeable, it remained light, and in thisbrightness the figure seemed to shine forward so that it now looked likeneither the God of Justice nor the God of Victory, it seemed now,rather, to be a perfect depiction of the God of the Hunt.  K. found thepainter's work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally hereproached himself for staying so long without having done anythingrelevant to his own affair.  "What's the name of this judge?" he askedsuddenly.  "I'm not allowed to tell you that," the painter answered.  Hewas bent deeply over the picture and clearly neglecting his guest who,at first, he had received with such care.  K. took this to be just afoible of the painter's, and it irritated him as it made him lose time.
"I take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said.  The painterimmediately put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his handstogether and looked at K. with a smile.  "Always straight out with thetruth," he said. "You want to learn something about the court, like itsays in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking aboutmy pictures to get me on your side.  Still, I won't hold it against you,you weren't to know that that was entirely the wrong thing to try withme. Oh, please!" he said sharply, repelling K.'s attempt to make someobjection.  He then continued, "And besides, you're quite right in yourcomment that I'm a trustee of the court."  He made a pause, as ifwanting to give K. the time to come to terms with this fact.  The girlscould once more be heard from behind the door.  They were probablypressed around the keyhole, perhaps they could even see into the roomthrough the gaps in the planks.  K. forewent the opportunity to excusehimself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from whathe was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get too far abovehimself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so heasked, "Is that a publicly acknowledged position?"  "No," was thepainter's curt reply, as if the question prevented him saying any more.
But K. wanted him to continue speaking and said, "Well, positions likethat, that aren't officially acknowledged, can often have more influencethan those that are."  "And that's how it is with me," said the painter,and nodded with a frown.  "I was talking about your case with themanufacturer yesterday, and he asked me if I wouldn't like to help you,and I answered: 'He can come and see me if he likes', and now I'mpleased to see you here so soon.  This business seems to be quiteimportant to you, and, of course, I'm not surprised at that.  Would younot like to take your coat off now?"  K. had intended to stay for only avery short time, but the painter's invitation was nonetheless verywelcome.  The air in the room had slowly become quite oppressive forhim, he had several times looked in amazement at a small, iron stove inthe corner that certainly could not have been lit, the heat of the roomwas inexplicable.  As he took off his winter overcoat and alsounbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I musthave warmth.  And it is very cosy here, isn't it.  This room's very goodin that respect."  K. made no reply, but it was actually not the heatthat made him uncomfortable but, much more, the stuffiness, the air thatalmost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probably not beenventilated for a long time.  The unpleasantness of this was made all thestronger for K. when the painter invited him to sit on the bed while hehimself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the easel.
The painter even seemed to misunderstand why K. remained at the edge ofthe bed and urged K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitated hewent over to the bed himself and pressed K. deep down into thebedclothes and pillows.  Then he went back to his seat and at last heasked his first objective question, which made K. forget everythingelse.  "You're innocent, are you?" he asked.  "Yes," said K.  He felt asimple joy at answering this question, especially as the answer wasgiven to a private individual and therefore would have no consequences.
Up till then no-one had asked him this question so openly.  To make themost of his pleasure he added, "I am totally innocent."  "So," said thepainter, and he lowered his head and seemed to be thinking.  Suddenly heraised his head again and said, "Well if you're innocent it's all verysimple."  K. began to scowl, this supposed trustee of the court wastalking like an ignorant child.  "My being innocent does not make thingssimple," said K.  Despite everything, he couldn't help smiling andslowly shook his head.  "There are many fine details in which the courtgets lost, but in the end it reaches into some place where originallythere was nothing and pulls enormous guilt out of it."  "Yeah, yeah,sure," said the painter, as if K. had been disturbing his train ofthought for no reason.  "But you are innocent, aren't you?"  "Well ofcourse I am," said K.  "That's the main thing," said the painter.  Therewas no counter-argument that could influence him, but although he hadmade up his mind it was not clear whether he was talking this waybecause of conviction or indifference.  K., then, wanted to find out andsaid therefore, "I'm sure you're more familiar with the court than I am,I know hardly more about it than what I've heard, and that's been frommany very different people.  But they were all agreed on one thing, andthat was that when ill thought-out accusations are made they are notignored, and that once the court has made an accusation it is convincedof the guilt of the defendant and it's very hard to make it thinkotherwise."  "Very hard?" the painter asked, throwing one hand up in theair.  "It's impossible to make it think otherwise.  If I painted all thejudges next to each other here on canvas, and you were trying to defendyourself in front of it, you'd have more success with them than you'dever have with the real court."  "Yes," said K. to himself, forgettingthat he had only gone there to investigate the painter.

One of the girls behind the door started up again, and asked,"Titorelli, is he going to go soon?"  "Quiet!" shouted the painter atthe door, "Can't you see I'm talking with the gentleman?"  But this wasnot enough to satisfy the girl and she asked, "You going to paint hispicture?"  And when the painter didn't answer she added, "Please don'tpaint him, he's an 'orrible bloke."  There followed an incomprehensible,interwoven babble of shouts and replies and calls of agreement.  Thepainter leapt over to the door, opened it very slightly - the girls'clasped hands could be seen stretching through the crack as if theywanted something - and said, "If you're not quiet I'll throw you alldown the stairs.  Sit down here on the steps and be quiet."  Theyprobably did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "Downon the steps!"  Only then it became quiet.

        "I'm sorry about that," said the painter as he returned to K.  K.
had hardly turned towards the door, he had left it completely up to thepainter whether and how he would place him under his protection if hewanted to.  Even now, he made hardly any movement as the painter bentover him and, whispering into his ear in order not to be heard outside,said, "These girls belong to the court as well."  "How's that?" askedK., as he leant his head to one side and looked at the painter.  But thepainter sat back down on his chair and, half in jest, half inexplanation, "Well, everything belongs to the court."  "That issomething I had never noticed until now," said K. curtly, this generalcomment of the painter's made his comment about the girls far lessdisturbing.  Nonetheless, K. looked for a while at the door, behindwhich the girls were now sitting quietly on the steps.  Except, that oneof them had pushed a drinking straw through a crack between the planksand was moving it slowly up and down.  "You still don't seem to havemuch general idea of what the court's about", said the painter, who hadstretched his legs wide apart and was tapping loudly on the floor withthe tip of his foot. "But as you're innocent you won't need it anyway.
I'll get you out of this by myself."  "How do you intend to do that?"asked K.  "You did say yourself not long ago that it's quite impossibleto go to the court with reasons and proofs."  "Only impossible forreasons and proofs you take to the court yourself"  said the painter,raising his forefinger as if K. had failed to notice a fine distinction.
"It goes differently if you try to do something behind the public court,that's to say in the consultation rooms, in the corridors or here, forinstance, in my studio."  K. now began to find it far easier to believewhat the painter was saying, or rather it was largely in agreement withwhat he had also been told by others.  In fact it was even quitepromising.  If it really was so easy to influence the judges throughpersonal contacts as the lawyer had said then the painter's contactswith these vain judges was especially important, and at the very leastshould not be undervalued.  And the painter would fit in very well inthe circle of assistants that K. was slowly gathering around himself.
He had been noted at the bank for his talent in organising, here, wherehe was placed entirely on his own resources, would be a good opportunityto test that talent to its limits.  The painter observed the effect hisexplanation had had on K. and then, with a certain unease, said, "Doesit not occur to you that the way I'm speaking is almost like a lawyer?It's the incessant contact with the gentlemen of the court has thatinfluence on me.  I gain a lot by it, of course, but I lose a lot,artistically speaking."   "How did you first come into contact with thejudges, then?" asked K., he wanted first to gain the painter's trustbefore he took him into his service.  "That was very easy," said thepainter, "I inherited these contacts.  My father was court painterbefore me.  It's a position that's always inherited.  They can't use newpeople for it, the rules governing how the various grades of officialsare painted are so many and varied, and, above all, so secret that no-one outside of certain families even knows them.  In the drawer there,for instance, I've got my father's notes, which I don't show to anyone.
But you're only able to paint judges if you know what they say.
Although, even if I lost them no-one could ever dispute my positionbecause of all the rules I just carry round in my head.  All the judgeswant to be painted like the old, great judges were, and I'm the only onewho can do that."  "You are to be envied," said K., thinking of hisposition at the bank.  "Your position is quite unassailable, then?""Yes, quite unassailable," said the painter, and he raised his shouldersin pride. "That's how I can even afford to help some poor man facingtrial now and then."  "And how do you do that?" asked K., as if thepainter had not just described him as a poor man.  The painter did notlet himself be distracted, but said, "In your case, for instance, asyou're totally innocent, this is what I'll do."  The repeated mention ofK.'s innocence was becoming irksome to him.  It sometimes seemed to himas if the painter was using these comments to make a favourable outcometo the trial a precondition for his help, which of course would make thehelp itself unnecessary.  But despite these doubts K. forced himself notto interrupt the painter.  He did not want to do without the painter'shelp, that was what he had decided, and this help did not seem in anyway less questionable than that of the lawyer.  K. valued the painter'shelp far more highly because it was offered in a way that was moreharmless and open.

The painter had pulled his seat closer to the bed and continued ina subdued voice: "I forgot to ask you; what sort of acquittal is it youwant?  There are three possibilities; absolute acquittal, apparentacquittal and deferment.  Absolute acquittal is the best, of course,only there's nothing I could do to get that sort of outcome.  I don'tthink there's anyone at all who could do anything to get an absoluteacquittal.  Probably the only thing that could do that is if the accusedis innocent.  As you are innocent it could actually be possible and youcould depend on your innocence alone.  In that case you won't need me orany other kind of help."
At first, K. was astonished at this orderly explanation, but then,just as quietly as the painter, he said, "I think you're contradictingyourself."  "How's that?" asked the painter patiently, leaning back witha smile.  This smile made K. feel as if he were examining not the wordsof the painter but seeking out inconsistencies in the procedures of thecourt itself.  Nonetheless, he continued unabashed and said, "Youremarked earlier that the court cannot be approached with reasonedproofs, you later restricted this to the open court, and now you go sofar as to say that an innocent man needs no assistance in court.  Thatentails a contradiction.  Moreover, you said earlier that the judges canbe influenced personally but now you insist that an absolute acquittal,as you call it, can never be attained through personal influence.  Thatentails a second contradiction."  "It's quite easy to clear up thesecontradictions," said the painter.  "We're talking about two differentthings here, there's what it says in the law and there's what I knowfrom my own experience, you shouldn't get the two confused.  I've neverseen it in writing, but the law does, of course, say on the one handthat the innocent will be set free, but on the other hand it doesn't saythat the judges can be influenced.  But in my experience it's the otherway round.  I don't know of any absolute acquittals but I do know ofmany times when a judge has been influenced.  It's possible, of course,that there was no innocence in any of the cases I know about.  But isthat likely?  Not a single innocent defendant in so many cases?  When Iwas a boy I used to listen closely to my father when he told us aboutcourt cases at home, and the judges that came to his studio talked aboutthe court, in our circles nobody talks about anything else; I hardlyever got the chance to go to court myself but always made use of it whenI could, I've listened to countless trials at important stages in theirdevelopment, I've followed them closely as far as they could befollowed, and I have to say that I've never seen a single acquittal.""So.  Not a single acquittal," said K., as if talking to himself and hishopes.  "That confirms the impression I already have of the court.  Sothere's no point in it from this side either.  They could replace thewhole court with a single hangman."  "You shouldn't generalise," saidthe painter, dissatisfied, "I've only been talking about my ownexperience."  "Well that's enough," said K., "or have you heard of anyacquittals that happened earlier?"  "They say there have been someacquittals earlier," the painter answered, "but it's very hard to besure about it.  The courts don't make their final conclusions public,not even the judges are allowed to know about them, so that all we knowabout these earlier cases are just legends.  But most of them didinvolve absolute acquittals, you can believe that, but they can't beproved.  On the other hand, you shouldn't forget all about them either,I'm sure there is some truth to them, and they are very beautiful, I'vepainted a few pictures myself depicting these legends."  "My assessmentwill not be altered by mere legends," said K.  "I don't suppose it'spossible to cite these legends in court, is it?"  The painter laughed.
"No, you can't cite them in court," he said.  "Then there's no point intalking about them," said K., he wanted, for the time being, to acceptanything the painter told him, even if he thought it unlikely orcontradicted what he had been told by others.  He did not now have thetime to examine the truth of everything the painter said or even todisprove it, he would have achieved as much as he could if the painterwould help him in any way even if his help would not be decisive.  As aresult, he said, "So let's pay no more attention to absolute acquittal,but you mentioned two other possibilities."  "Apparent acquittal anddeferment.  They're the only possibilities," said the painter.  "Butbefore we talk about them, would you not like to take your coat off?You must be hot."  "Yes," said K., who until then had paid attention tonothing but the painter's explanations, but now that he had had the heatpointed out to him his brow began to sweat heavily.  "It's almostunbearable."  The painter nodded as if he understood K.'s discomfortvery well.  "Could we not open the window?" asked K.  "No," said thepainter.  "It's only a fixed pane of glass, it can't be opened."  K. nowrealised that all this time he had been hoping the painter wouldsuddenly go over to the window and pull it open.  He had preparedhimself even for the fog that he would breathe in through his openmouth.  The thought that here he was entirely cut off from the air madehim feel dizzy.  He tapped lightly on the bedspread beside him and, witha weak voice, said, "That is very inconvenient and unhealthy."  "Oh no,"said the painter in defence of his window, "as it can't be opened thisroom retains the heat better than if the window were double glazed, eventhough it's only a single pane.  There's not much need to air the roomas there's so much ventilation through the gaps in the wood, but when Ido want to I can open one of my doors, or even both of them."  K. wasslightly consoled by this explanation and looked around to see where thesecond door was.  The painter saw him do so and said, "It's behind you,I had to hide it behind the bed."  Only then was K. able to see thelittle door in the wall.  "It's really much too small for a studiohere," said the painter, as if he wanted to anticipate an objection K.
would make.  "I had to arrange things as well as I could.  That'sobviously a very bad place for the bed, in front of the door.  Forinstance when the judge I'm painting at present comes he always comesthrough the door by the bed, and I've even given him a key to this doorso that he can wait for me here in the studio when I'm not home.
Although nowadays he usually comes early in the morning when I'm stillasleep.  And of course, it always wakes me up when I hear the dooropened beside the bed, however fast asleep I am.  If you could hear theway I curse him as he climbs over my bed in the morning you'd lose allrespect for judges.  I suppose I could take the key away from him butthat'd only make things worse.  It only takes a tiny effort to break anyof the doors here off their hinges."  All the time the painter wasspeaking, K. was considering whether he should take off his coat, but hefinally realised that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable tostay here any longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on hisknee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the conversationwas over.  He had hardly done this when one of the girls called out,"Now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressingaround the gaps in the planks to see the spectacle for themselves.  "Thegirls think I'm going to paint your portrait," said the painter, "andthat's why you're taking your coat off."  "I see," said K., onlyslightly amused by this, as he felt little better than he had beforeeven though he now sat in his shirtsleeves.  With some irritation heasked, "What did you say the two other possibilities were?"  He hadalready forgotten the terms used.  "Apparent acquittal and deferment,"said the painter.  "It's up to you which one you choose.  You can geteither of them if I help you, but it'll take some effort of course, thedifference between them is that apparent acquittal needs concentratedeffort for a while and that deferment takes much less effort but it hasto be sustained.  Now then, apparent acquittal.  If that's what you wantI'll write down an assertion of your innocence on a piece of paper.  Thetext for an assertion of this sort was passed down to me from my fatherand it's quite unassailable.  I take this assertion round to the judgesI know.  So I'll start off with the one I'm currently painting, and putthe assertion to him when he comes for his sitting this evening.  I'lllay the assertion in front of him, explain that you're innocent and givehim my personal guarantee of it.  And that's not just a superficialguarantee, it's a real one and it's binding."  The painter's eyes seemedto show some reproach of K. for wanting to impose that sort ofresponsibility on him.  "That would be very kind of you", said K.  "Andwould the judge then believe you and nonetheless not pass an absoluteacquittal?"  "It's like I just said," answered the painter.  "Andanyway, it's not entirely sure that all the judges would believe me,many of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see thempersonally.  So then you'd have to come along too.  But at least then,if that happens, the matter is half way won, especially as I'd teach youin advance exactly how you'd need to act with the judge concerned, ofcourse.  What also happens, though, is that there are some judges who'llturn me down in advance, and that's worse.  I'll certainly make severalattempts, but still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least wecan afford to do that as no one judge can pass the decisive verdict.
Then when I've got enough judges' signatures on this document I take itto the judge who's concerned with your case.  I might even have hissignature already, in which case things develop a bit quicker than theywould do otherwise.  But there aren't usually many hold ups from thenon, and that's the time that the defendant can feel most confident.
It's odd, but true, that people feel more confidence in this time thanthey do after they've been acquitted.  There's no particular exertionneeded now.  When he has the document asserting the defendant'sinnocence, guaranteed by a number of other judges, the judge can acquityou without any worries, and although there are still severalformalities to be gone through there's no doubt that that's what he'lldo as a favour to me and several other acquaintances.  You, however,walk out the court and you're free."  "So, then I'll be free," said K.,hesitantly.  "That's right," said the painter, "but only apparently freeor, to put it a better way, temporarily free, as the most junior judges,the ones I know, they don't have the right to give the final acquittal.
Only the highest judge can do that, in the court that's quite out of reachfor you, for me and for all of us.  We don't know how things look thereand, incidentally, we don't want to know.   The right to acquit peopleis a major privilege and our judges don't have it, but they do have theright to free people from the indictment.  That's to say, if they'refreed in this way then for the time being the charge is withdrawn butit's still hanging over their heads and it only takes an order fromhigher up to bring it back into force.  And as I'm in such good contactwith the court I can also tell you how the difference between absoluteand apparent acquittal is described, just in a superficial way, in thedirectives to the court offices.  If there's an absolute acquittal allproceedings should stop, everything disappears from the process, notjust the indictment but the trial and even the acquittal disappears,everything just disappears.  With an apparent acquittal it's different.
When that happens, nothing has changed except that the case for yourinnocence, for your acquittal and the grounds for the acquittal havebeen made stronger.  Apart from that, proceedings go on as before, thecourt offices continue their business and the case gets passed to highercourts, gets passed back down to the lower courts and so on, backwardsand forwards, sometimes faster, sometimes slower, to and fro.  It'simpossible to know exactly what's happening while this is going on.
Seen from outside it can sometimes seem that everything has been longsince forgotten, the documents have been lost and the acquittal iscomplete.  No-one familiar with the court would believe it.  Nodocuments ever get lost, the court forgets nothing.   One day - no-oneexpects it - some judge or other picks up the documents and looks moreclosely at them, he notices that this particular case is still active,and orders the defendant's immediate arrest.  I've been talking here asif there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and re-arrest, thatis quite possible and I do know of cases like that, but it's just aslikely that the defendant goes home after he's been acquitted and findssomebody there waiting to re-arrest him.  Then, of course, his life as afree man is at an end."  "And does the trial start over again?" askedK., finding it hard to believe.  "The trial will always start overagain," said the painter, "but there is, once again as before, thepossibility of getting an apparent acquittal.  Once again, the accusedhas to muster all his strength and mustn't give up."  The painter saidthat last phrase possibly as a result of the impression that K., whoseshoulders had dropped somewhat, gave on him.  "But to get a secondacquittal," asked K., as if in anticipation of further revelations bythe painter, "is that not harder to get than the first time?"  "As faras that's concerned," answered the painter, "there's nothing you can sayfor certain.  You mean, do you, that the second arrest would have anadverse influence on the judge and the verdict he passes on thedefendant?  That's not how it happens.  When the acquittal is passed thejudges are already aware that re-arrest is likely.  So when it happensit has hardly any effect.  But there are countless other reasons why thejudges' mood and their legal acumen in the case can be altered, andefforts to obtain the second acquittal must therefore be suited to thenew conditions, and generally just as vigorous as the first."  "But thissecond acquittal will once again not be final," said K., shaking hishead.  "Of course not," said the painter, "the second acquittal isfollowed by the third arrest, the third acquittal by the fourth arrestand so on.  That's what is meant by the term apparent acquittal."  K.
was silent.  "You clearly don't think an apparent acquittal offers muchadvantage," said the painter, "perhaps deferment would suit you better.
Would you like me to explain what deferment is about?"  K. nodded.  Thepainter had leant back and spread himself out in his chair, hisnightshirt was wide open, he had pushed his hand inside and was strokinghis breast and his sides.  "Deferment," said the painter, lookingvaguely in front of himself for a while as if trying to find a perfectlyappropriate explanation, "deferment consists of keeping proceedingspermanently in their earliest stages.  To do that, the accused and thosehelping him need to keep in continuous personal contact with the court,especially those helping him.  I repeat, this doesn't require so mucheffort as getting an apparent acquittal, but it probably requires a lotmore attention.  You must never let the trial out of your sight, youhave to go and see the appropriate judge at regular intervals as well aswhen something in particular comes up and, whatever you do, you have totry and remain friendly with him; if you don't know the judge personallyyou have to influence him through the judges you do know, and you haveto do it without giving up on the direct discussions.  As long as youdon't fail to do any of these things you can be reasonably sure thetrial won't get past its first stages.  The trial doesn't stop, but thedefendant is almost as certain of avoiding conviction as if he'd beenacquitted.  Compared with an apparent acquittal, deferment has theadvantage that the defendant's future is less uncertain, he's safe fromthe shock of being suddenly re-arrested and doesn't need to fear theexertions and stress involved in getting an apparent acquittal just wheneverything else in his life would make it most difficult.  Defermentdoes have certain disadvantages of its own though, too, and theyshouldn't be under-estimated.  I don't mean by this that the defendantis never free, he's never free in the proper sense of the word with anapparent acquittal either.  There's another disadvantage.  Proceedingscan't be prevented from moving forward unless there are some at leastostensible reasons given.  So something needs to seem to be happeningwhen looked at from the outside.  This means that from time to timevarious injunctions have to be obeyed, the accused has to be questioned,investigations have to take place and so on.  The trial's beenartificially constrained inside a tiny circle, and it has to becontinuously spun round within it.  And that, of course, brings with itcertain unpleasantnesses for the accused, although you shouldn't imaginethey're all that bad.  All of this is just for show, the interrogations,for instance, they're only very short, if you ever don't have the timeor don't feel like going to them you can offer an excuse, with somejudges you can even arrange the injunctions together a long time inadvance, in essence all it means is that, as the accused, you have toreport to the judge from time to time."  Even while the painter wasspeaking those last words K. had laid his coat over his arm and hadstood up.  Immediately, from outside the door, there was a cry of  'He'sstanding up now!'.  "Are you leaving already?" asked the painter, whohad also stood up.  "It must be the air that's driving you out.  I'mvery sorry about that.  There's still a lot I need to tell you.  I hadto put everything very briefly but I hope at least it was all clear.""Oh yes," said K., whose head was aching from the effort of listening.
Despite this affirmation the painter summed it all up once more, as ifhe wanted to give K. something to console him on his way home.  "Bothhave in common that they prevent the defendant being convicted," hesaid.  "But they also prevent his being properly acquitted," said K.
quietly, as if ashamed to acknowledge it. "You've got it, in essence,"said the painter quickly.  K. placed his hand on his winter overcoat butcould not bring himself to put it on.  Most of all he would have likedto pack everything together and run out to the fresh air.  Not even thegirls could induce him to put his coat on, even though they were alreadyloudly telling each other that he was doing so.  The painter still hadto interpret K.'s mood in some way, so he said, "I expect you'vedeliberately avoided deciding between my suggestions yet.  That's good.
I would even have advised against making a decision straight away.
There's no more than a hair's breadth of difference between theadvantages and disadvantages.  Everything has to be carefully weighedup.  But the most important thing is you shouldn't lose too much time.""I'll come back here again soon," said K., who had suddenly decided toput his frock coat on, threw his overcoat over his shoulder and hurriedover to the door behind which the girls now began to scream.  K. thoughthe could even see the screaming girls through the door.  "Well, you'llhave to keep your word," said the painter, who had not followed him,"otherwise I'll come to the bank to ask about it myself."  "Will you openthis door for me," said K. pulling at the handle which, as he noticedfrom the resistance, was being held tightly by the girls on the otherside.  "Do you want to be bothered by the girls?" asked the painter.
"It's better if you use the other way out," he said, pointing to thedoor behind the bed.  K. agreed to this and jumped back to the bed.  Butinstead of opening that door the painter crawled under the bed and fromunderneath it asked K., "Just a moment more, would you not like to see apicture I could sell to you?"  K. did not want to be impolite, thepainter really had taken his side and promised to help him more in thefuture, and because of K.'s forgetfulness there had been no mention ofany payment for the painter's help, so K. could not turn him down nowand allowed him to show him the picture, even though he was quiveringwith impatience to get out of the studio.  From under the bed, thepainter withdrew a pile of unframed paintings.  They were so covered indust that when the painter tried to blow it off the one on top the dustswirled around in front of K.'s eyes, robbing him of breath for sometime.  "Moorland landscape," said the painter passing the picture to K.
It showed two sickly trees, well separated from each other in darkgrass.  In the background there was a multi-coloured sunset.  "That'snice," said K.  "I'll buy it."  K. expressed himself in this curt waywithout any thought, so he was glad when the painter did not take thisamiss and picked up a second painting from the floor.  "This is acounterpart to the first picture," said the painter.  Perhaps it hadbeen intended as a counterpart, but there was not the slightestdifference to be seen between it and the first picture, there were thetrees, there the grass and there the sunset.  But this was of littleimportance to K.  "They are beautiful landscapes," he said, "I'll buythem both and hang them in my office."  "You seem to like this subject,"said the painter, picking up a third painting, "good job I've still gotanother, similar picture here."  The picture though, was not similar,rather it was exactly the same moorland landscape.  The painter wasfully exploiting this opportunity to sell off his old pictures.  "I'lltake this one too," said K.  "How much do the three paintings cost?""We can talk about that next time," said the painter.  "You're in ahurry now, and we'll still be in contact.  And besides, I'm glad youlike the paintings, I'll give you all the paintings I've got down here.
They're all moorland landscapes, I've painted a lot of moorlandlandscapes.  A lot of people don't like that sort of picture becausethey're too gloomy, but there are others, and you're one of them, wholove gloomy themes."  But K. was not in the mood to hear about theprofessional experiences of this painter cum beggar.  "Wrap them allup!" he called out, interrupting the painter as he was speaking, "myservant will come to fetch them in the morning."  "There's no need forthat," said the painter.  "I expect I can find a porter for you who cango with you now."  And, at last, he leant over the bed and unlocked thedoor.  "Just step on the bed, don't worry about that," said the painter,"that's what everyone does who comes in here."  Even without thisinvitation, K. had shown no compunction in already placing his foot inthe middle of the bed covers, then he looked out through the open doorand drew his foot back again.  "What is that?" he asked the painter.
"What are you so surprised at?" he asked, surprised in his turn.  "Thoseare court offices.  Didn't you know there are court offices here?  Thereare court offices in almost every attic, why should this building be anydifferent?  Even my studio is actually one of the court offices but thecourt put it at my disposal."  It was not so much finding court officeseven here that shocked K., he was mainly shocked at himself, at his ownnaïvety in court matters.  It seemed to him that one of the most basicrules governing how a defendant should behave was always to be prepared,never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right whenthe judge stood beside him to his left - and this was the very basicrule that he was continually violating.  A long corridor extended infront of him, air blew in from it which, compared with the air in thestudio, was refreshing.  There were benches set along each side of thecorridor just as in the waiting area for the office he went to himself.
There seemed to be precise rules governing how offices should beequipped.   There did not seem to be many people visiting the officesthat day.  There was a man there, half sitting, half laying, his facewas buried in his arm on the bench and he seemed to be sleeping; anotherman was standing in the half-dark at the end of the corridor.  K. nowclimbed over the bed, the painter followed him with the pictures.  Theysoon came across a servant of the court - K. was now able to recogniseall the servants of the court from the gold buttons they wore on theircivilian clothes below the normal buttons - and the painter instructedhim to go with K. carrying the pictures.  K. staggered more than hewalked, his handkerchief pressed over his mouth.  They had nearlyreached the exit when the girls stormed in on them, so K. had not beenable to avoid them.  They had clearly seen that the second door of thestudio had been opened and had gone around to impose themselves on himfrom this side.  "I can't come with you any further!" called out thepainter with a laugh as the girls pressed in.  "Goodbye, and don'thesitate too long!"  K. did not even look round at him.  Once on thestreet he took the first cab he came across.  He now had to get rid ofthe servant, whose gold button continually caught his eye even if itcaught no-one else's.  As a servant, the servant of the court was goingto sit on the coach-box.  But K. chased him down from there.  It wasalready well into the afternoon when K. arrived in front of the bank.
He would have liked to leave the pictures in the cab but feared theremight be some occasion when he would have to let the painter see hestill had them.  So he had the pictures taken to his office and lockedthem in the lowest drawer of his desk so that he could at least keepthem safe from the deputy director's view for the next few days.




Chapter EightBlock, the businessman  - Dismissing the lawyer
K. had at last made the decision to withdraw his defence from thelawyer.   It was impossible to remove his doubts as to whether this wasthe right decision, but this was outweighed by his belief in itsnecessity.  This decision, on the day he intended to go to see thelawyer, took a lot of the strength he needed for his work, he workedexceptionally slowly, he had to remain in his office a long time, and itwas already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of thelawyer's front door.  Even before he rang he considered whether it mightnot be better to give the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, apersonal conversation would certainly be very difficult.  Nonetheless,K. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by anyother means it would be received in silence or with a few formulatedwords, and unless Leni could discover anything K. would never learn howthe lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its consequences might be,in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion.  But sitting in front of himand taken by surprise by his dismissal, K. would be able easily to infereverything he wanted from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if hecould not be induced to say very much.  It was not even out of thequestion that K. might, after all, be persuaded that it would be best toleave his defence to the lawyer and withdraw his dismissal.

        As usual, there was at first no response to K.'s ring at the door.
"Leni could be a bit quicker," thought K.  But he could at least be gladthere was nobody else interfering as usually happened, be it the man inhis nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him.  As K. pressed onthe button for the second time he looked back at the other door, butthis time it, too, remained closed.  At last, two eyes appeared at thespy-hatch in the lawyer's door, although they weren't Leni's eyes.
Someone unlocked the door, but kept himself pressed against it as hecalled back inside, "It's him!", and only then did he open the doorproperly.  K. pushed against the door, as behind him he could alreadyhear the key being hurriedly turned in the lock of the door to the otherflat.  When the door in front of him finally opened, he stormed straightinto the hallway.  Through the corridor which led between the rooms hesaw Leni, to whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed,still running away in her nightshirt.  He looked at her for a momentand then looked round at the person who had opened the door.  It was asmall, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand.  "Doyou work here?" asked K.  "No," answered the man, "I don't belong hereat all, the lawyer is only representing me, I'm here on legal business.""Without your coat?" asked K., indicating the man's deficiency of dresswith a gesture of his hand.  "Oh, do forgive me!" said the man, and helooked at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he hadnot known about his appearance until then.
"Is Leni your lover?" asked K. curtly.  He had set his legs slightlyapart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back.
Merely by being in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantageover this thin little man.  "Oh God," he said and, shocked, raised onehand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you bethinking?"  "You look honest enough," said K. with a smile, "but comealong anyway."  K. indicated with his hat which way the man was to goand let him go ahead of him.  "What is your name then?" asked K. on theway.  "Block.  I'm a businessman," said the small man, twisting himselfround as he thus introduced himself, although K. did not allow him tostop moving.  "Is that your real name?" asked K.  "Of course it is," wasthe man's reply, "why do you doubt it?"  "I thought you might have somereason to keep your name secret," said K.  He felt himself as much atliberty as is normally only felt in foreign parts when speaking withpeople of lower standing, keeping everything about himself to himself,speaking only casually about the interests of the other, able to raisehim to a level above one's own, but also able, at will, to let him dropagain.  K. stopped at the door of the lawyer's office, opened it and, tothe businessman who had obediently gone ahead, called, "Not so fast!Bring some light here!"  K. thought Leni might have hidden in here, helet the businessman search in every corner, but the room was empty.  Infront of the picture of the judge K. took hold of the businessman'sbraces to stop him moving on.  "Do you know him?" he asked, pointingupwards with his finger.  The businessman lifted the candle, blinked ashe looked up and said, "It's a judge."  "An important judge?" asked K.,and stood to the side and in front of the businessman so that he couldobserve what impression the picture had on him.  The businessman waslooking up in admiration.  "He's an important judge."  "You don't havemuch insight," said K.  "He is the lowest of the lowest examiningjudges."  "I remember now," said the businessman as he lowered thecandle, "that's what I've already been told."  "Well of course youhave," called out K., "I'd forgotten about it, of course you wouldalready have been told."  "But why, why?" asked the businessman as hemoved forwards towards the door, propelled by the hands of K.  Outsidein the corridor K. said,"You know where Leni's hidden, do you?"  "Hidden?" said the businessman,"No, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup for the lawyer."  "Whydidn't you say that immediately?" asked K.  "I was going to take youthere, but you called me back again," answered the businessman, as ifconfused by the contradictory commands.  "You think you're very clever,don't you," said K, "now take me there!"  K. had never been in thekitchen, it was surprisingly big and very well equipped.  The stovealone was three times bigger than normal stoves, but it was not possibleto see any detail beyond this as the kitchen was at the time illuminatedby no more than a small lamp hanging by the entrance.  At the stovestood Leni, in a white apron as always, breaking eggs into a potstanding on a spirit lamp.
"Good evening, Josef," she said with a glance sideways.  "Good evening,"said K., pointing with one hand to a chair in a corner which thebusinessman was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it.  K. howeverwent very close behind Leni's back, leant over her shoulder and asked,"Who is this man?"  Leni put one hand around K. as she stirred the soupwith the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "He's apitiful character, a poor businessman by the name of Block.  Just lookat him."  The two of them looked back over their shoulders.  Thebusinessman was sitting on the chair that K. had directed him to, he hadextinguished the candle whose light was no longer needed and pressed onthe wick with his fingers to stop the smoke.  "You were in yournightshirt," said K., putting his hand on her head and turning it backtowards the stove.  She was silent.  "Is he your lover?" asked K.  Shewas about to take hold of the pot of soup, but K. took both her handsand said, "Answer me!"  She said, "Come into the office, I'll explaineverything to you."  "No," said K., "I want you to explain it here."She put her arms around him and wanted to kiss him.  K., though, pushedher away and said, "I don't want you to kiss me now."  "Josef," saidLeni, looking at K. imploringly but frankly in the eyes, "you're notgoing to be jealous of Mr. Block now, are you?  Rudi," she then said,turning to the businessman, "help me out will you, I'm being suspectedof something, you can see that, leave the candle alone."  It had lookedas though Mr. Block had not been paying attention but he had beenfollowing closely.  "I don't even know why you might be jealous," hesaid ingenuously.  "Nor do I, actually," said K., looking at thebusinessman with a smile.  Leni laughed out loud and while K. was notpaying attention took the opportunity of embracing him and whispering,"Leave him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is.  I've beenhelping him a little bit because he's an important client of thelawyer's, and no other reason.  And what about you?  Do you want tospeak to the lawyer at this time of day?  He's very unwell today, but ifyou want I'll tell him you're here.  But you can certainly spend thenight with me.  It's so long since you were last here, even the lawyerhas been asking about you.  Don't neglect your case!  And I've got somethings to tell you that I've learned about.  But now, before anythingelse, take your coat off!"  She helped him off with his coat, took thehat off his head, ran with the things into the hallway to hang them up,then she ran back and saw to the soup.  "Do you want me to tell himyou're here straight away or take him his soup first?"  "Tell him I'mhere first," said K.  He was in a bad mood, he had originally intended adetailed discussion of his business with Leni, especially the questionof his giving the lawyer notice, but now he no longer wanted to becauseof the presence of the businessman.  Now he considered his affair tooimportant to let this little businessman take part in it and perhapschange some of his decisions, and sohe called Leni back even though she was already on her way to thelawyer.  "Bring him his soup first," he said, "I want him to get hisstrength up for the discussion with me, he'll need it."  "You're aclient of the lawyer's too, aren't you," said the businessman quietlyfrom his corner as if he were trying to find this out.  It was not,however, taken well.  "What business is that of yours?" said K., andLeni said,"Will you be quiet. - I'll take him his soup first then, shall I?" Andshe poured the soup into a dish. "The only worry then is that he mightgo to sleep soon after he's eaten."  "What I've got to say to him willkeep him awake," said K., who still wanted to intimate that he intendedsome important negotiations with the lawyer, he wanted Leni to ask himwhat it was and only then to ask her advice.  But instead, she justpromptly carried out the order he had given her.  When she went over tohim with the dish she deliberately brushed against him and whispered,"I'll tell him you're here as soon as he's eaten the soup so that I canget you back as soon as possible."  "Just go," said K., "just go."  "Bea bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turnedcompletely round once more in the doorway.

K. watched her as she went; the decision had finally been madethat the lawyer was to be dismissed, it was probably better that he hadnot been able to discuss the matter any more with Leni beforehand; shehardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would certainly haveadvised him against it and perhaps would even have prevented him fromdismissing the lawyer this time, he would have remained in doubt andunease and eventually have carried out his decision after a while anywayas this decision was something he could not avoid.  The sooner it wascarried out the more harm would be avoided.  And moreover, perhaps thebusinessman had something to say on the matter.

K. turned round, the businessman hardly noticed it as he was aboutto stand up.  "Stay where you are," said K. and pulled up a chair besidehim.  "Have you been a client of the lawyer's for a long time?" asked K.
"Yes," said the businessman, "a very long time."  "How many years has hebeen representing you so far, then?" asked K.  "I don't know how youmean," said the businessman, "he's been my business lawyer - I buy andsell cereals - he's been my business lawyer since I took the businessover, and that's about twenty years now, but perhaps you mean my owntrial and he's been representing me in that since it started, and that'sbeen more than five years.  Yes, well over five years," he then added,pulling out an old briefcase, "I've got everything written down; I cantell you the exact dates if you like.  It's so hard to remembereverything.  Probably, my trial's been going on much longer than that,it started soon after the death of my wife, and that's been more thanfive and a half years now."  K. moved in closer to him.  "So the lawyertakes on ordinary legal business, does he?" he asked.  This combinationof criminal and commercial business seemed surprisingly reassuring forK.  "Oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered,  "They evensay he's more efficient in jurisprudence than he is in other matters."But then he seemed to regret saying this, and he laid a hand on K.'sshoulder and said, "Please don't betray me to him, will you."  K. pattedhis thigh to reassure him and said, "No, I don't betray people."  "Hecan be so vindictive, you see," said the businessman.
"I'm sure he won't do anything against such a faithful client as you,"said K.  "Oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he gets cross itdoesn't matter who it is, and anyway, I'm not really faithful to him.""How's that then?" asked K.  "I'm not sure I should tell you about it,"said the businessman hesitantly.  "I think it'll be alright," said K.
"Well then," said the businessman, "I'll tell you about some of it, butyou'll have to tell me a secret too, then we can support each other withthe lawyer."  "You are very careful," said K., "but I'll tell you asecret that will set your mind completely at ease.  Now tell me, in whatway have you been unfaithful to the lawyer?"  "I've ..." said thebusinessman hesitantly, and in a tone as if he were confessing somethingdishonourable, "I've taken on other lawyers besides him."  "That's notso serious," said K., a little disappointed.  "It is, here," said thebusinessman, who had had some difficulty breathing since making hisconfession but who now, after hearing K.'s comment, began to feel moretrust for him.  "That's not allowed.  And it's allowed least of all totake on petty lawyers when you've already got a proper one.  And that'sjust what I have done, besides him I've got five petty lawyers.""Five!" exclaimed K., astonished at this number, "Five lawyers besidesthis one?"  The businessman nodded.  "I'm even negotiating with a sixthone."  "But why do you need so many lawyers?" asked K.  "I need all ofthem," said the businessman.  "Would you mind explaining that to me?"asked K.  "I'd be glad to," said the businessman.  "Most of all, I don'twant to lose my case, well that's obvious.  So that means I mustn'tneglect anything that might be of use to me; even if there's very littlehope of a particular thing being of any use I can't just throw it away.
So everything I have I've put to use in my case.  I've taken all themoney out of my business, for example, the offices for my business usedto occupy nearly a whole floor, but now all I need is a little room atthe back where I work with one apprentice.  It wasn't just using up themoney that caused the difficulty, of course, it was much more to do withme not working at the business as much as I used to.  If you want to dosomething about your trial you don't have much time for anything else.""So you're also working at the court yourself?" asked K.  "That's justwhat I want to learn more about."  "I can't tell you very much aboutthat," said the businessman, "at first I tried to do that too but I soonhad to give it up again.  It wears you out too much, and it's really notmuch use.  And it turned out to be quite impossible to work thereyourself and to negotiate, at least for me it was.  It's a heavy strainthere just sitting and waiting.  You know yourself what the air is likein those offices."  "How do you know I've been there, then?" asked K.
"I was in the waiting room myself when you went through."  "What acoincidence that is!" exclaimed K., totally engrossed and forgetting howridiculous the businessman had seemed to him earlier.  "So you saw me!You were in the waiting room when I went through.  Yes, I did go throughit one time."  "It isn't such a big coincidence," said the businessman,"I'm there nearly every day."  "I expect I'll have to go there quiteoften myself now," said K., "although I can hardly expect to be shownthe same respect as I was then.  They all stood up for me.  They musthave thought I was a judge."  "No," said the businessman, "we weregreeting the servant of the court.  We knew you were a defendant.  Thatsort of news spreads very quickly."  "So you already knew about that,"said K., "the way I behaved must have seemed very arrogant to you.  Didyou criticise me for it afterwards?"  "No," said the businessman, "quitethe opposite.  That was just stupidity."  "What do you mean,'stupidity'?" asked K.  "Why are you asking about it?" said thebusinessman in some irritation.  "You still don't seem to know thepeople there and you might take it wrong.  Don't forget in proceedingslike this there are always lots of different things coming up to talkabout, things that you just can't understand with reason alone, you justget too tired and distracted for most things and so, instead, peoplerely on superstition.  I'm talking about the others, but I'm no bettermyself.  One of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learna lot about the outcome of a defendant's case by looking at his face,especially the shape of his lips.  There are lots who believe that, andthey said they could see from the shape of your lips that you'ddefinitely be found guilty very soon.  I repeat that all this is just aridiculous superstition, and in most cases it's completely disproved bythe facts, but when you live in that society it's hard to hold yourselfback from beliefs like that.  Just think how much effect thatsuperstition can have.  You spoke to one of them there, didn't you?  Hewas hardly able to give you an answer.  There are lots of things therethat can make you confused, of course, but one of them, for him, was theappearance of your lips.  He told us all later he thought he could seesomething in your lips that meant he'd be convicted himself."  "On mylips?" asked K., pulling out a pocket mirror and examining himself.  "Ican see nothing special about my lips.  Can you?"  "Nor can I," said thebusinessman, "nothing at all."  "These people are so superstitious!"exclaimed K.  "Isn't that what I just told you?" asked the businessman.
"Do you then have that much contact with each other, exchanging eachother's opinions?" said K.  "I've kept myself completely apart so far.""They don't normally have much contact with each other," said thebusinessman, "that would be impossible, there are so many of them.  Andthey don't have much in common either.  If a group of them ever thinksthey have found something in common it soon turns out they weremistaken.  There's nothing you can do as a group where the court'sconcerned.  Each case is examined separately, the court is verypainstaking.  So there's nothing to be achieved by forming into a group,only sometimes an individual will achieve something in secret; and it'sonly when that's been done the others learn about it; nobody knows howit was done.  So there's no sense of togetherness, you meet people nowand then in the waiting rooms, but we don't talk much there.  Thesuperstitious beliefs were established a long time ago and they spreadall by themselves."  "I saw those gentlemen in the waiting room," saidK., "it seemed so pointless for them to be waiting in that way.""Waiting is not pointless," said the businessman, "it's only pointlessif you try and interfere yourself.  I told you just now I've got fivelawyers besides this one.  You might think - I thought it myself atfirst - you might think I could leave the whole thing entirely up tothem now.  That would be entirely wrong.  I can leave it up to them lessthan when I had just the one.  Maybe you don't understand that, do you?""No," said K., and to slow the businessman down, who had been speakingtoo fast, he laid his hand on the businessman's to reassure him, "butI'd like just to ask you to speak a little more slowly, these are manyvery important things for me, and I can't follow exactly what you'resaying."  "You're quite right to remind me of that," said thebusinessman, "you're new to all this, a junior.  Your trial is sixmonths old, isn't it?  Yes, I've heard about it.  Such a new case!  ButI've already thought all these things through countless times, to methey're the most obvious things in the world."  "You must be glad yourtrial has already progressed so far, are you?" asked K., he did not wishto ask directly how the businessman's affairs stood, but received noclear answer anyway.  "Yes, I've been working at my trial for five yearsnow," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no smallachievement."  Then he was silent for a while.  K. listened to hearwhether Leni was on her way back.  On the one hand he did not want herto come back too soon as he still had many questions to ask and did notwant her to find him in this intimate discussion with the businessman,but on the other hand it irritated him that she stayed so long with thelawyer when K. was there, much longer than she needed to give him hissoup.  "I still remember it exactly," the businessman began again, andK. immediately gave him his full attention, "when my case was as old asyours is now.  I only had this one lawyer at that time but I wasn't verysatisfied with him."  Now I'll find out everything, thought K., noddingvigorously as if he could thereby encourage the businessman to sayeverything worth knowing.  "My case," the businessman continued, "didn'tmove on at all, there were some hearings that took place and I went toevery one of them, collected materials, handed all my business books tothe court - which I later found was entirely  unnecessary - I ran backand forth to the lawyer, and he submitted various documents to the courttoo ..."  "Various documents?" asked K.  "Yes, that's right," said thebusinessman.  "That's very important for me," said K., "in my case he'sstill working on the first set of documents.  He still hasn't doneanything.  I see now that he's been neglecting me quite disgracefully.""There can be lots of good reasons why the first documents still aren'tready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turned out later on thatthe ones he submitted for me were entirely worthless.  I even read oneof them myself, one of the officials at the court was very helpful.  Itwas very learned, but it didn't actually say anything.  Most of all,there was lots of Latin, which I can't understand, then pages and pagesof general appeals to the court, then lots of flattery for particularofficials, they weren't named, these officials, but anyone familiar withthe court must have been able to guess who they were, then there wasself-praise by the lawyer where he humiliated himself to the court in away that was downright dog-like, and then endless investigations ofcases from the past which were supposed to be similar to mine.
Although, as far as I was able to follow them, these investigations hadbeen carried out very carefully.  Now, I don't mean to criticise thelawyer's work with all of this, and the document I read was only one ofmany, but even so, and this is something I will say, at that time Icouldn't see any progress in my trial at all."  "And what sort ofprogress had you been hoping for?" asked K.  "That's a very sensiblequestion," said the businessman with a smile, "it's only very rare thatyou see any progress in these proceedings at all.  But I didn't knowthat then.  I'm a businessman, much more in those days than now, Iwanted to see some tangible progress, it should have all been moving tosome conclusion or at least should have been moving on in some wayaccording to the rules.  Instead of which there were just more hearings,and most of them went through the same things anyway; I had all theanswers off pat like in a church service; there were messengers from thecourt coming to me at work several times a week, or they came to me athome or anywhere else they could find me; and that was very disturbingof course (but at least now things are better in that respect, it's muchless disturbing when they contact you by telephone), and rumours aboutmy trial even started to spread among some of the people I do businesswith, and especially my relations, so I was being made to suffer in manydifferent ways but there was still not the slightest sign that even thefirst hearing would take place soon.  So I went to the lawyer andcomplained about it.  He explained it all to me at length, but refusedto do anything I asked for, no-one has any influence on the way thetrial proceeds, he said, to try and insist on it in any of the documentssubmitted - like I was asking - was simply unheard of and would do harmto both him and me.  I thought to myself: What this lawyer can't orwon't do another lawyer will.  So I looked round for other lawyers.  Andbefore you say anything: none of them asked for a definite date for themain trial and none of them got one, and anyway, apart from oneexception which I'll talk about in a minute, it really is impossible,that's one thing this lawyer didn't mislead me about; but besides, I hadno reason to regret turning to other lawyers.  Perhaps you've alreadyheard how Dr. Huld talks about the petty lawyers, he probably made themsound very contemptible to you, and he's right, they are contemptible.
But when he talks about them and compares them with himself and hiscolleagues there's a small error running through what he says, and, justfor your interest, I'll tell you about it.  When he talks about thelawyers he mixes with he sets them apart by calling them the 'greatlawyers'.  That's wrong, anyone can call himself 'great' if he wants to,of course, but in this case only the usage of the court can make thatdistinction.  You see, the court says that besides the petty lawyersthere are also minor lawyers and great lawyers.  This one and hiscolleagues are only minor lawyers, and the difference in rank betweenthem and the great lawyers, who I've only ever heard about and neverseen, is incomparably greater than between the minor lawyers and thedespised petty lawyers."  "The great lawyers?" asked K.  "Who are theythen?  How do you contact them?"  "You've never heard about them, then?"said the businessman.  "There's hardly anyone who's been accused whodoesn't spend a lot of time dreaming about the great lawyers once he'sheard about them.  It's best if you don't let yourself be misled in thatway.  I don't know who the great lawyers are, and there's probably noway of contacting them.  I don't know of any case I can talk about withcertainty where they've taken any part.  They do defend a lot of people,but you can't get hold of them by your own efforts, they only defendthose who they want to defend.  And I don't suppose they ever take oncases that haven't already got past the lower courts.  Anyway, it's bestnot to think about them, as if you do it makes the discussions with theother lawyers, all their advice and all that they do manage to achieve,seem so unpleasant and useless, I had that experience myself, justwanted to throw everything away and lay at home in bed and hear nothingmore about it.  But that, of course, would be the stupidest thing youcould do, and you wouldn't be left in peace in bed for very longeither."  "So you weren't thinking about the great lawyers at thattime?" asked K.  "Not for very long," said the businessman, and smiledagain, "you can't forget about them entirely, I'm afraid, especially inthe night when these thoughts come so easily.  But I wanted immediateresults in those days, so I went to the petty lawyers."
"Well look at you two sat huddled together!" called Leni as shecame back with the dish and stood in the doorway.  They were indeed satclose together, if either of them turned his head even slightly it wouldhave knocked against the other's, the businessman was not only verysmall but also sat hunched down, so that K. was also forced to bend downlow if he wanted to hear everything.  "Not quite yet!" called out K., toturn Leni away, his hand, still resting on the businessman's hand,twitching with impatience.  "He wanted me to tell him about my trial,"said the businessman to Leni.  "Carry on, then, carry on," she said.
She spoke to the businessman with affection but, at the same time, withcondescension.  K. did not like that, he had begun to learn that the manwas of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he waswilling to share it.  Leni was probably wrong about him.  He watched herin irritation as Leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand -which he had been holding on to all this time - wiped his hand with herapron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax that had drippedfrom the candle onto his trousers.  "You were about to tell me about thepetty lawyers," said K., shoving Leni's hand away with no furthercomment.  "What's wrong with you today?" asked Leni, tapped him gentlyand carried on with what she had been doing.  "Yes, the petty lawyers,"said the businessman, putting his hand to his brow as if thinking hard.
K. wanted to help him and said, "You wanted immediate results and sowent to the petty lawyers.""Yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue withwhat he'd been saying.  "Maybe he doesn't want to speak about it infront of Leni," thought K., suppressing his impatience to hear the reststraight away, and stopped trying to press him.

"Have you told him I'm here?" he asked Leni.  "Course I have," shesaid, "he's waiting for you.  Leave Block alone now, you can talk toBlock later, he'll still be here."  K. still hesitated.  "You'll stillbe here?" he asked the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from himand not wanting Leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren'tthere, he was full of secret resentment towards Leni today.  And oncemore it was only Leni who answered.  "He often sleeps here."  "He sleepshere?" exclaimed K., he had thought the businessman would just waitthere for him while he quickly settled his business with the lawyer, andthen they would leave together to discuss everything thoroughly andundisturbed.  "Yes," said Leni, "not everyone's like you, Josef, allowedto see the lawyer at any time you like.  Don't even seem surprisedthat the lawyer, despite being ill, still receives you at eleven o'clockat night.  You take it far too much for granted, what your friends dofor you.  Well, your friends, or at least I do, we like to do things foryou.  I don't want or need any more thanks than that you're fond of me.""Fond of you?" thought K. at first, and only then it occurred to him,"Well, yes, I am fond of her." Nonetheless, what he said, forgetting allthe rest, was, "He receives me because I am his client.  If I neededanyone else's help I'd have to beg and show gratitude whenever I doanything."  "He's really nasty today, isn't he?" Leni asked thebusinessman.  "Now it's me who's not here," thought K., and nearly losthis temper with the businessman when, with the same rudeness as Leni, hesaid, "The lawyer also has other reasons to receive him.  His case ismuch more interesting than mine.  And it's only in its early stages too,it probably hasn't progressed very far so the lawyer still likes to dealwith him.  That'll all change later on."  "Yeah, yeah," said Leni,looking at the businessman and laughing. "He doesn't half talk!" shesaid, turning to face K.  "You can't believe a word he says.  He's astalkative as he is sweet.  Maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him.
At least, he only sees him when he's in the right mood.  I've alreadytried hard to change that but it's impossible.  Just think, there aretimes when I tell him Block's here and he doesn't receive him untilthree days later.  And if Block isn't on the spot when he's called theneverything's lost and it all has to start all over again.  That's why Ilet Block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time Dr. Huld has wantedto see him in the night.  So now Block is ready for that.   Sometimes,when he knows Block is still here, he'll even change his mind aboutletting him in to see him."  K. looked questioningly at the businessman.
The latter nodded and, although he had spoken quite openly with K.
earlier, seemed to be confused with shame as he said, "Yes, later on youbecome very dependent on your lawyer."  "He's only pretending to mind,"said Leni.  "He likes to sleep here really, he's often said so."  Shewent over to a little door and shoved it open.  "Do you want to see hisbedroom?" she asked.  K. went over to the low, windowless room andlooked in from the doorway.  The room contained a narrow bed whichfilled it completely, so that to get into the bed you would need toclimb over the bedpost.  At the head of the bed there was a niche in thewall where, fastidiously tidy, stood a candle, a bottle of ink, and apen with a bundle of papers which were probably to do with the trial.
"You sleep in the maid's room?" asked K., as he went back to thebusinessman.  "Leni's let me have it," answered the businessman, "it hasmany advantages."  K. looked long at him; his first impression of thebusinessman had perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trialhad already lasted a long time, but he had paid a heavy price for thisexperience.  K. was suddenly unable to bear the sight of the businessmanany longer.  "Bring him to bed, then!" he called out to Leni, who seemedto understand him.  For himself, he wanted to go to the lawyer and, bydismissing him, free himself from not only the lawyer but also from Leniand the businessman.  But before he had reached the door the businessmanspoke to him gently.  "Excuse me, sir," he said, and K. looked roundcrossly.  "You've forgotten your promise," said the businessman,stretching his hand out to K. imploringly from where he sat.  "You weregoing to tell me a secret."  "That is true," said K., as he glanced atLeni, who was watching him carefully, to check on her.  "So listen; it'shardly a secret now anyway.  I'm going to see the lawyer now to sackhim."  "He's sacking him!" yelled the businessman, and he jumped up fromhis chair and ran around the kitchen with his arms in the air.  He kepton shouting, "He's sacking his lawyer!"  Leni tried to rush at K. butthe businessman got in her way so that she shoved him away with herfists.  Then, still with her hands balled into fists, she ran after K.
who, however, had been given a long start.  He was already inside thelawyer's room by the time Leni caught up with him.  He had almost closedthe door behind himself, but Leni held the door open with her foot,grabbed his arm and tried to pull him back.  But he put such pressure onher wrist that, with a sigh, she was forced to release him.  She did notdare go into the room straight away, and K. locked the door with thekey.

"I've been waiting for you a very long time," said the lawyer fromhis bed.  He had been reading something by the light of a candle but nowhe laid it onto the bedside table and put his glasses on, looking at K.
sharply through them.  Instead of apologising K. said, "I'll be leavingagain soon."  As he had not apologised the lawyer ignored what K. said,and replied, "I won't let you in this late again next time."  "I findthat quite acceptable," said K.  The lawyer looked at him quizzically.
"Sit down," he said.  "As you wish," said K., drawing a chair up to thebedside table and sitting down.
"It seemed to me that you locked the door," said the lawyer.  "Yes,"said K., "it was because of Leni."  He had no intention of lettinganyone off lightly.  But the lawyer asked him, "Was she beingimportunate again?"  "Importunate?" asked K.  "Yes," said the lawyer,laughing as he did so, had a fit of coughing and then, once it hadpassed, began to laugh again.  "I'm sure you must have noticed howimportunate she can be sometimes," he said, and patted K.'s hand whichK. had rested on the bedside table and which he now snatched back.  "Youdon't attach much importance to it, then," said the lawyer when K. wassilent, "so much the better.  Otherwise I might have needed to apologiseto you.  It is a peculiarity of Leni's.  I've long since forgiven herfor it, and I wouldn't be talking of it now, if you hadn't locked thedoor just now.  Anyway, perhaps I should at least explain thispeculiarity of hers to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the wayyou're looking at me, and so that's why I'll do it, this peculiarity ofhers consists in this; Leni finds most of the accused attractive.  Sheattaches herself to each of them, loves each of them, even seems to beloved by each of them; then she sometimes entertains me by telling meabout them when I allow her to.  I am not so astonished by all of thisas you seem to be.  If you look at them in the right way the accusedreally can be attractive, quite often.  But that is a remarkable and tosome extent scientific phenomenon.  Being indicted does not cause anyclear, precisely definable change in a person's appearance, of course.
But it's not like with other legal matters, most of them remain in theirusual way of life and, if they have a good lawyer looking after them,the trial doesn't get in their way.  But there are nonetheless those whohave experience in these matters who can look at a crowd, however big,and tell you which among them is facing a charge.  How can they do that,you will ask.  My answer will not please you.  It is simply that thosewho are facing a charge are the most attractive.  It cannot be theirguilt that makes them attractive as not all of them are guilty - atleast that's what I, as a lawyer, have to say - and nor can it be theproper punishment that has made them attractive as not all of them arepunished, so it can only be that the proceedings levelled against themtake some kind of hold on them.  Whatever the reason, some of theseattractive people are indeed very attractive.  But all of them areattractive, even Block, pitiful worm that he is."  As the lawyerfinished what he was saying, K. was fully in control of himself, he hadeven nodded conspicuously at his last few words in order to confirm tohimself the view he had already formed; that the lawyer was trying toconfuse him, as he always did, by making general and irrelevantobservations, and thus distract him from the main question of what hewas actually doing for K.'s trial.  The lawyer must have noticed that K.
was offering him more resistance than before, as he became silent,giving  K. the chance to speak himself, and then, as K. also remainedsilent, he asked, "Did you have a particular reason for coming to see metoday?"  "Yes," said K., putting his hand up to slightly shade his eyesfrom the light of the candle so that he could see the lawyer better, "Iwanted to tell you that I'm withdrawing my representation from you, withimmediate effect."  "Do I understand you rightly?" asked the lawyer ashe half raised himself in his bed and supported himself with one hand onthe pillow.  "I think you do," said K., sitting stiffly upright as ifwaiting in ambush.  "Well we can certainly discuss this plan of yours,"said the lawyer after a pause.  "It's not a plan any more," said K.
"That may be," said the lawyer, "but we still mustn't rush anything."He used the word 'we', as if he had no intention of letting K. go free,and as if, even if he could no longer represent him, he could still atleast continue as his adviser.  "Nothing is being rushed," said K.,standing slowly up and going behind his chair, "everything has been wellthought out and probably even for too long.  The decision is final.""Then allow me to say a few words," said the lawyer, throwing the bedcover to one side and sitting on the edge of the bed.  His naked, white-haired legs shivered in the cold.  He asked K. to pass him a blanketfrom the couch.  K. passed him the blanket and said, "You are runningthe risk of catching cold for no reason."  "The circumstances areimportant enough," said the lawyer as he wrapped the bed cover aroundthe top half of his body and then the blanket around his legs.  "Youruncle is my friend and in the course of time I've become fond of you aswell.  I admit that quite openly.  There's nothing in that for me to beashamed of."  It  was very unwelcome for K. to hear the old man speak inthis touching way, as it forced him to explain himself more fully, whichhe would rather have avoided, and he was aware that it also confused himeven though it could never make him reverse his decision.  "Thank youfor feeling so friendly toward me," he said, "and I also realise howdeeply involved you've been in my case, as deeply as possible foryourself and to bring as much advantage as possible to me.  Nonetheless,I have recently come to the conviction that it is not enough.  I wouldnaturally never attempt, considering that you are so much older and moreexperienced than I am, to convince you of my opinion; if I have everunintentionally done so then I beg your forgiveness, but, as you havejust said yourself, the circumstances are important enough and it is mybelief that my trial needs to be approached with much more vigour thanhas so far been the case."  "I see," said the lawyer, "you've becomeimpatient."  "I am not impatient," said K., with some irritation and hestopped paying so much attention to his choice of words.  "When I firstcame here with my uncle you probably noticed I wasn't greatly concernedabout my case, and if I wasn't reminded of it by force, as it were, Iwould forget about it completely.  But my uncle insisted I should allowyou to represent me and I did so as a favour to him.  I could haveexpected the case to be less of a burden than it had been, as the pointof taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of its weight.  Butwhat actually happened was the opposite.  Before, the trial was neversuch a worry for me as it has been since you've been representing me.
When I was by myself I never did anything about my case, I was hardlyaware of it, but then, once there was someone representing me,everything was set for something to happen, I was always, without cease,waiting for you to do something, getting more and more tense, but youdid nothing.  I did get some information about the court from you that Iprobably could not have got anywhere else, but that can't be enough whenthe trial, supposedly in secret, is getting closer and closer to me."K. had pushed the chair away and stood erect, his hands in the pocketsof his frock coat.  "After a certain point in the proceedings," said thelawyer quietly and calmly, "nothing new of any importance ever happens.
So many litigants, at the same stage in their trials, have stood beforeme just like you are now and spoken in the same way."  "Then these otherlitigants," said K., "have all been right, just as I am.  That does notshow that I'm not."  "I wasn't trying to show that you were mistaken,"said the lawyer, "but I wanted to add that I expected better judgementfrom you than from the others, especially as I've given you more insightinto the workings of the court and my own activities than I normally do.
And now I'm forced to accept that, despite everything, you have toolittle trust in me.  You don't make it easy for me."  How the lawyer washumiliating himself to K.!  He was showing no regard for the dignity ofhis position, which on this point, must have been at its most sensitive.
And why did he do that?  He did seem to be very busy as a lawyer as wella rich man, neither the loss of income nor the loss of a client couldhave been of much importance to him in themselves.  He was moreoverunwell and should have been thinking of passing work on to others.  Anddespite all that he held on tightly to K.  Why?  Was it somethingpersonal for his uncle's sake, or did he really see K.'s case as onethat was exceptional and hoped to be able to distinguish himself withit, either for K.'s sake or - and this possibility could never beexcluded - for his friends at the court?  It was not possible to learnanything by looking at him, even though K. was scrutinizing him quitebrazenly.  It could almost be supposed he was deliberately hiding histhoughts as he waited to see what effect his words would have.  But heclearly deemed K.'s silence to be favourable for himself and hecontinued, "You will have noticed the size of my office, but that Idon't employ any staff to help me.  That used to be quite different,there was a time when several young lawyers were working for me but nowI work alone.  This is partly to do with changes in the way I dobusiness, in that I concentrate nowadays more and more on matters suchas your own case, and partly to do with the ever deeper understandingthat I acquire from these legal matters.  I found that I could never letanyone else deal with this sort of work unless I wanted to harm both theclient and the job I had taken on.  But the decision to do all the workmyself had its obvious result: I was forced to turn almost everyone awaywho asked me to represent them and could only accept those I wasespecially interested in - well there are enough creatures who leap atevery crumb I throw down, and they're not so very far away.  Mostimportantly, I became ill from over-work.  But despite that I don'tregret my decision, quite possibly I should have turned more cases awaythan I did, but it did turn out to be entirely necessary for me todevote myself fully to the cases I did take on, and the successfulresults showed that it was worth it.  I once read a description of thedifference between representing someone in ordinary legal matters and inlegal matters of this sort, and the writer expressed it very well.  Thisis what he said: some lawyers lead their clients on a thread untiljudgement is passed, but there are others who immediately lift theirclients onto their shoulders and carry them all the way to the judgementand beyond.  That's just how it is.  But it was quite true when I said Inever regret all this work.  But if, as in your case, they are so fullymisunderstood, well, then I come very close to regretting it."  All thistalking did more to make K. impatient than to persuade him.  From theway the lawyer was speaking, K. thought he could hear what he couldexpect if he gave in, the delays and excuses would begin again, reportsof how the documents were progressing, how the mood of the courtofficials had improved, as well as all the enormous difficulties - inshort all that he had heard so many times before would be brought outagain even more fully, he would try to mislead K. with hopes that werenever specified and to make him suffer with threats that were neverclear.  He had to put a stop to that, so he said, "What will youundertake on my behalf if you continue to represent me?"  The lawyerquietly accepted even this insulting question, and answered, "I shouldcontinue with what I've already been doing for you."  "That's just whatI thought," said K., "and now you don't need to say another word."  "Iwill make one more attempt," said the lawyer as if whatever had beenmaking K. so annoyed was affecting him too.  "You see, I have theimpression that you have not only misjudged the legal assistance I havegiven you but also that that misjudgement has led you to behave in thisway, you seem, although you are the accused, to have been treated toowell or, to put it a better way, handled with neglect, with apparentneglect.  Even that has its reason; it is often better to be in chainsthan to be free.  But I would like to show you how other defendants aretreated, perhaps you will succeed in learning something from it.  What Iwill do is I will call Block in, unlock the door and sit down herebeside the bedside table."  "Be glad to," said K., and did as the lawyersuggested; he was always ready to learn something new.  But to make sureof himself for any event he added, "but you do realise that you are nolonger to be my lawyer, don't you?"  "Yes," said the lawyer.  "But youcan still change your mind today if you want to."  He lay back down inthe bed, pulled the quilt up to his chin and turned to face the wall.
Then he rang.

Leni appeared almost the moment he had done so.  She lookedhurriedly at K. and the lawyer to try and find out what had happened;she seemed to be reassured by the sight of K. sitting calmly at thelawyer's bed.  She smiled and nodded to K., K. looked blankly back ather.  "Fetch Block," said the lawyer.  But instead of going to fetchhim, Leni just went to the door and called out, "Block!  To the lawyer!"Then, probably because the lawyer had turned his face to the wall andwas paying no attention, she slipped in behind K.'s chair.  From thenon, she bothered him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or,albeit very tenderly and carefully, she would run her hands through hishair and over his cheeks.  K. eventually tried to stop her by takinghold of one hand, and after some resistance Leni let him keep hold ofit.  Block came as soon as he was called, but he remained standing inthe doorway and seemed to be wondering whether he should enter or not.
He raised his eyebrows and lowered his head as if listening to find outwhether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated.  K. could haveencouraged to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not onlywith the lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himselfmotionless.  Leni was also silent.  Block noticed that at least no-onewas chasing him away, and, on tiptoe, he entered the room, his face wastense, his hands were clenched behind his back.  He left the door openin case he needed to go back again.  K. did not even glance at him, helooked instead only at the thick quilt under which the lawyer could notbe seen as he had squeezed up very close to the wall.  Then his voicewas heard: "Block here?" he asked.  Block had already crept some wayinto the room but this question seemed to give him first a shove in thebreast and then another in the back, he seemed about to fall butremained standing, deeply bowed, and said, "At your service, sir.""What do you want?" asked the lawyer, "you've come at a bad time.""Wasn't I summoned?" asked Block, more to himself than the lawyer.  Heheld his hands in front of himself as protection and would have beenready to run away any moment.  "You were summoned," said the lawyer,"but you have still come at a bad time."  Then, after a pause he added,"You always come at a bad time."  When the lawyer started speaking Blockhad stopped looking at the bed but stared rather into one of thecorners, just listening, as if the light from the speaker were brighterthan Block could bear to look at.  But it was also difficult for him tolisten, as the lawyer was speaking into the wall and speaking quicklyand quietly.  "Would you like me to go away again, sir?" asked Block.
"Well you're here now," said the lawyer. "Stay!"  It was as if thelawyer had not done as Block had wanted but instead threatened him witha stick, as now Block really began to shake.  "I went to see," said thelawyer, "the third judge yesterday, a friend of mine, and slowly broughtthe conversation round to the subject of you.  Do you want to know whathe said?"  "Oh, yes please," said Block.  The lawyer did not answerimmediately, so Block repeated his request and lowered his head as ifabout to kneel down.  But then K. spoke to him:  "What do you thinkyou're doing?" he shouted.  Leni had wanted to stop him from calling outand so he took hold of her other hand.  It was not love that made himsqueeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sighed frequently and triedto disengage her hands from him.  But Block was punished for K.'soutburst, as the lawyer asked him, "Who is your lawyer?"  "You are,sir," said Block.  "And who besides me?" the lawyer asked.  "No-onebesides you, sir," said Block.  "And let there be no-one besides me,"said the lawyer.  Block fully understood what that meant, he glowered atK., shaking his head violently.  If these actions had been translatedinto words they would have been coarse insults.  K. had been friendlyand willing to discuss his own case with someone like this!  "I won'tdisturb you any more," said K., leaning back in his chair.  "You cankneel down or creep on all fours, whatever you like.  I won't botherwith you any more."  But Block still had some sense of pride, at leastwhere K. was concerned, and he went towards him waving his fists,shouting as loudly as he dared while the lawyer was there.  "Youshouldn't speak to me like that, that's not allowed.  Why are youinsulting me?  Especially here in front of the lawyer, where both of us,you and me, we're only tolerated because of his charity.  You're not abetter person than me, you've been accused of something too, you'refacing a charge too.  If, in spite of that, you're still a gentlemanthen I'm just as much a gentleman as you are, if not even more so.  AndI want to be spoken to as a gentleman, especially by you.  If you thinkbeing allowed to sit there and quietly listen while I creep on all foursas you put it makes you something better than me, then there's an oldlegal saying you ought to bear in mind: If you're under suspicion it'sbetter to be moving than still, as if you're still you can be in the panof the scales without knowing it and be weighed along with your sins."K. said nothing.  He merely looked in amazement at this distractedbeing, his eyes completely still.  He had gone through such changes injust the last few hours!  Was it the trial that was throwing him fromside to side in this way and stopped him knowing who was friend and whowas foe?  Could he not see the lawyer was deliberately humiliating himand had no other purpose today than to show off his power to K., andperhaps even thereby subjugate K.?  But if Block was incapable of seeingthat, or if he so feared the lawyer that no such insight would even beof any use to him, how was it that he was either so sly or so bold as tolie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had otherlawyers working on his behalf?  And how did he dare to attack K., whocould betray his secret any time he liked?  But he dared even more thanthis, he went to the lawyer's bed and began there to make complaintsabout K.  "Dr. Huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way this man spoketo me?  You can count the length of his trial in hours, and he wants totell me what to do when I've been involved in a legal case for fiveyears.  He even insults me.  He doesn't know anything, but he insultsme, when I, as far as my weak ability allows, when I've made a closestudy of how to behave with the court, what we ought to do and what thecourt practices are."  "Don't let anyone bother you," said the lawyer,"and do what seems to you to be right."  "I will," said Block, as ifspeaking to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance tothe side he kneeled down close beside the bed.  "I'm kneeling now Dr.
Huld, sir," he said.  But the lawyer remained silent.  With one hand,Block carefully stroked the bed cover.  In the silence while he did so,Leni, as she freed herself from K.'s hands, said, "You're hurting me.
Let go of me.  I'm going over to Block."  She went over to him and saton the edge of the bed.  Block was very pleased at this and with lively,but silent, gestures he immediately urged her to intercede for him withthe lawyer.  It was clear that he desperately needed to be toldsomething by the lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make useof the information with his other lawyers.  Leni probably knew very wellhow the lawyer could be brought round, pointed to his hand and pursedher lips as if making a kiss.  Block immediately performed the hand-kissand, at further urging from Leni, repeated it twice more.  But thelawyer continued to be silent.  Then Leni leant over the lawyer, as shestretched out, the attractive shape of her body could be seen, and, bentover close to his face, she stroked his long white hair.  That nowforced him to give an answer.  "I'm rather wary of telling him," saidthe lawyer, and his head could be seen shaking slightly, perhaps so thathe would feel the pressure of Leni's hand better.  Block listenedclosely with his head lowered, as if by listening he were breaking anorder.  "What makes you so wary about it?" asked Leni.  K. had thefeeling he was listening to a contrived dialogue that had been repeatedmany times, that would be repeated many times more, and that for Blockalone it would never lose its freshness.  "What has his behaviour beenlike today?" asked the lawyer instead of an answer.  Before Leni saidanything she looked down at Block and watched him a short while as heraised his hands towards her and rubbed them together imploringly.
Finally she gave a serious nod, turned back to the lawyer and said,"He's been quiet and industrious."  This was an elderly businessman, aman whose beard was long, and he was begging a young girl to speak onhis behalf.  Even if there was some plan behind what he did, there wasnothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his fellow man.  K.
could not understand how the lawyer could have thought this performancewould win him over.  Even if he had done nothing earlier to make himwant to leave then this scene would have done so.  It was almosthumiliating even for the onlooker.  So these were the lawyer's methods,which K. fortunately had not been exposed to for long, to let the clientforget about the whole world and leave him with nothing but the hope ofreaching the end of his trial by this deluded means.  He was no longer aclient, he was the lawyer's dog.  If the lawyer had ordered him to crawlunder the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from under it, thenhe would have done so with enthusiasm.  K. listened to all of this,testing it and thinking it over as if he had been given the task ofclosely observing everything spoken here, inform a higher office aboutit and write a report.  "And what has he been doing all day?" asked thelawyer.  "I kept him locked in the maid's room all day," said Leni, "sothat he wouldn't stop me doing my work.  That's where he usually stays.
From time to time I looked in through the spyhole to see what he wasdoing, and each time he was kneeling on the bed and reading the papersyou gave him, propped up on the window sill.  That made a goodimpression on me; as the window only opens onto an air shaft and giveshardly any light.  It showed how obedient he is that he was even readingin those conditions."  "I'm pleased to hear it," said the lawyer.  "Butdid he understand what he was reading?"  While this conversation wasgoing on, Block continually moved his lips and was clearly formulatingthe answers he hoped Leni would give.  "Well I can't give you anycertain answer to that of course," said Leni, "but I could see that hewas reading thoroughly.  He spent all day reading the same page, runninghis finger along the lines.  Whenever I looked in on him he sighed as ifthis reading was a lot of work for him.  I expect the papers you gavehim were very hard to understand."  "Yes," said the lawyer, "theycertainly are that.  And I really don't think he understood anything ofthem.  But they should at least give him some inkling of just how hard astruggle it is and how much work it is for me to defend him.  And who amI doing all this hard work for?  I'm doing it - it's laughable even tosay it - I'm doing it for Block.  He ought to realise what that means,too.  Did he study without a pause?"  "Almost without a pause," answeredLeni.  "Just the once he asked me for a drink of water, so I gave him aglassful through the window.  Then at eight o'clock I let him out andgave him something to eat."  Block glanced sideways at K., as if he werebeing praised and had to impress K. as well.  He now seemed moreoptimistic, he moved more freely and rocked back and forth on his knees.
This made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard thefollowing words from the lawyer:  "You speak well of him," said thelawyer, "but that's just what makes it difficult for me.  You see, thejudge did not speak well of him at all, neither about Block nor abouthis case."  "Didn't speak well of him?" asked Leni.  "How is thatpossible?"  Block looked at her with such tension he seemed to thinkthat although the judge's words had been spoken so long before she wouldbe able to change them in his favour.  "Not at all," said the lawyer.
"In fact he became quite cross when I started to talk about Block tohim. 'Don't talk to me about Block,' he said.  'He is my client,' saidI.  'You're letting him abuse you,' he said.  'I don't think his case islost yet,' said I.  'You're letting him abuse you,' he repeated.  'Idon't think so,' said I.  'Block works hard in his case and always knowswhere it stands.  He practically lives with me so that he always knowswhat's happening.  You don't always find such enthusiasm as that.  He'snot very pleasant personally, I grant you, his manners are terrible andhe's dirty, but as far as the trial's concerned he's quite immaculate.'I said immaculate, but I was deliberately exaggerating.   Then he said,'Block is sly, that's all.  He's accumulated plenty of experience andknows how to delay proceedings.  But there's more that he doesn't knowthan he does.  What do you think he'd say if he learned his trial stillhasn't begun, if you told him they haven't even rung the bell toannounce the start of proceedings?'  Alright Block, alright," said thelawyer, as at these words Block had begun to raise himself on histrembling knees and clearly wanted to plead for some explanation.  Itwas the first time the lawyer had spoken any clear words directly toBlock.  He looked down with his tired eyes, half blankly and half atBlock, who slowly sank back down on his knees under this gaze.  "Whatthe judge said has no meaning for you," said the lawyer.  "You needn'tbe frightened at every word.  If you do it again I won't tell youanything else at all.  It's impossible to start a sentence without youlooking at me as if you were receiving your final judgement.  You shouldbe ashamed of yourself here in front of my client!  And you'redestroying the trust he has for me.  Just what is it you want?  You'restill alive, you're still under my protection.  There's no point inworrying!  Somewhere you've read that the final judgement can often comewithout warning, from anyone at any time.  And, in the rightcircumstances, that's basically true, but it's also true that I dislikeyour anxiety and fear and see that you don't have the trust in me youshould have.  Now what have I just said?  I repeated something said byone of the judges.  You know that there are so many various opinionsabout the procedure that they form into a great big pile and nobody canmake any sense of them.  This judge, for instance, sees proceedings asstarting at a different point from where I do.  A difference of opinion,nothing more.  At a certain stage in the proceedings tradition has itthat a sign is given by ringing a bell.  This judge sees that as thepoint at which proceedings begin.  I can't set out all the opinionsopposed to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway,suffice it to say that there are many reasons to disagree with him."Embarrassed, Block ran his fingers through the pile of the carpet, hisanxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferiorstatus towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself andturned the judges words round to examine them from all sides.  "Block,"said Leni, as if reprimanding him, and, taking hold of the collar of hiscoat, pulled him up slightly higher.  "Leave the carpet alone and listento what the lawyer is saying."
This chapter was left unfinished.




Chapter NineIn the Cathedral
A very important Italian business contact of the bank had come tovisit the city for the first time and K. was given the task of showinghim some of its cultural sights.  At any other time he would have seenthis job as an honour but now, when he was finding it hard even tomaintain his current position in the bank, he accepted it only withreluctance.  Every hour that he could not be in the office was a causeof concern for him, he was no longer able to make use of his time in theoffice anything like as well as he had previously, he spent many hoursmerely pretending to do important work, but that only increased hisanxiety about not being in the office.  Then he sometimes thought he sawthe deputy director, who was always watching, come into K.'s office, sitat his desk, look through his papers, receive clients who had almostbecome old friends of K., and lure them away from him, perhaps he evendiscovered mistakes, mistakes that seemed to threaten K. from a thousanddirections when he was at work now, and which he could no longer avoid.
So now, if he was ever asked to leave the office on business or evenneeded to make a short business trip, however much an honour it seemed -and tasks of this sort happened to have increased substantially recently- there was always the suspicion that they wanted to get him out of hisoffice for a while and check his work, or at least the idea that theythought he was dispensable.  It would not have been difficult for him toturn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, ifhis fears had the slightest foundation, turning the jobs down would havebeen an acknowledgement of them.  For this reason, he never demurredfrom accepting them, and even when he was asked to go on a tiringbusiness trip lasting two days he said nothing about having to go out inthe rainy autumn weather when he had a severe chill, just in order toavoid the risk of not being asked to go.  When, with a raging headache,he arrived back from this trip he learned that he had been chosen toaccompany the Italian business contact the following day.  Thetemptation for once to turn the job down was very great, especially asit had no direct connection with business, but there was no denying thatsocial obligations towards this business contact were in themselvesimportant enough, only not for K., who knew quite well that he neededsome successes at work if he was to maintain his position there andthat, if he failed in that, it would not help him even if this Italiansomehow found him quite charming; he did not want to be removed from hisworkplace for even one day, as the fear of not being allowed back in wastoo great, he knew full well that the fear was exaggerated but it stillmade him anxious.  However, in this case it was almost impossible tothink of an acceptable excuse, his knowledge of Italian was not greatbut still good enough; the deciding factor was that K. had earlier knowna little about art history and this had become widely known around thebank in extremely exaggerated form, and that K. had been a member of theSociety for the Preservation of City Monuments, albeit only for businessreasons.  It was said that this Italian was an art lover, so the choiceof K. to accompany him was a matter of course.

It was a very rainy and stormy morning when K., in a foul temperat the thought of the day ahead of him, arrived early at seven o'clockin the office so that he could at least do some work before his visitorwould prevent him.  He had spent half the night studying a book ofItalian grammar so that he would be somewhat prepared and was verytired; his desk was less attractive to him than the window where he hadspent far too much time sitting of late, but he resisted the temptationand sat down to his work.  Unfortunately, just then the servitor came inand reported that the director had sent him to see whether the chiefclerk was already in his office; if he was, then would he please be sokind as to come to his reception room as the gentleman from Italy wasalready there.  "I'll come straight away," said K.  He put a smalldictionary in his pocket, took a guide to the city's tourist sites underhis arm that he had compiled for strangers, and went through the deputydirector's office into that of the director.  He was glad he had comeinto the office so early and was able to be of service immediately,nobody could seriously have expected that of him.  The deputy director'soffice was, of course, still as empty as the middle of the night, theservitor had probably been asked to summon him too but without success.
As K. entered the reception room two men stood up from the deeparmchairs where they had been sitting.  The director gave him a friendlysmile, he was clearly very glad that K. was there, he immediatelyintroduced him to the Italian who shook K.'s hand vigorously and jokedthat somebody was an early riser.  K. did not quite understand whom hehad in mind, it was moreover an odd expression to use and it took K. alittle while to guess its meaning.  He replied with a few bland phraseswhich the Italian received once more with a laugh, passing his handnervously and repeatedly over his blue-grey, bushy moustache.  Thismoustache was obviously perfumed, it was almost tempting to come closeto it and sniff.  When they had all sat down and begun a lightpreliminary conversation, K. was disconcerted to notice that heunderstood no more than fragments of what the Italian said.  When hespoke very calmly he understood almost everything, but that was veryinfrequent, mostly the words gushed from his mouth and he seemed to beenjoying himself so much his head shook.  When he was talking in thisway his speech was usually wrapped up in some kind of dialect whichseemed to K. to have nothing to do with Italian but which the directornot only understood but also spoke, although K. ought to have foreseenthis as the Italian came from the south of his country where thedirector had also spent several years.  Whatever the cause, K. realisedthat the possibility of communicating with the Italian had been largelytaken from him, even his French was difficult to understand, and hismoustache concealed the movements of his lips which might have offeredsome help in understanding what he said.  K. began to anticipate manydifficulties,  he gave up trying to understand what the Italian said -with the director there, who could understand him so easily, it wouldhave been pointless effort - and for the time being did no more thanscowl at the Italian as he relaxed sitting deep but comfortable in thearmchair, as he frequently pulled at his short, sharply tailored jacketand at one time lifted his arms in the air and moved his hands freely totry and depict something that K. could not grasp, even though he wasleaning forward and did not let the hands out of his sight.   K. hadnothing to occupy himself but mechanically watch the exchange betweenthe two men and his tiredness finally made itself felt, to his alarm,although fortunately in good time, he once caught himself nearly gettingup, turning round and leaving.  Eventually the Italian looked at theclock and jumped up.  After taking his leave from the director he turnedto K., pressing himself so close to him that K. had to push his chairback just so that he could move.  The director had, no doubt, seen theanxiety in K.'s eyes as he tried to cope with this dialect of Italian,he joined in with this conversation in a way that was so adroit andunobtrusive that he seemed to be adding no more than minor comments,whereas in fact he was swiftly and patiently breaking into what theItalian said so that K. could understand.  K. learned in this way thatthe Italian first had a few business matters to settle, that heunfortunately had only a little time at his disposal, that he certainlydid not intend to rush round to see every monument in the city, that hewould much rather - at least as long as K. would agree, it was entirelyhis decision  - just see the cathedral and to do so thoroughly.  He wasextremely pleased to be accompanied by someone who was so learned and sopleasant - by this he meant K., who was occupied not with listening tothe Italian but the director - and asked if he would be so kind, if thetime was suitable, to meet him in the cathedral in two hours' time atabout ten o'clock.  He hoped he would certainly be able to be there atthat time.  K. made an appropriate reply, the Italian shook first thedirector's hand and then K.'s, then the director's again and went to thedoor, half turned to the two men who followed him and continuing to talkwithout a break.  K. remained together with the director for a shortwhile, although the director looked especially unhappy today.  Hethought he needed to apologise to K. for something and told him - theywere standing intimately close together - he had thought at first hewould accompany the Italian himself, but then - he gave no more precisereason than this - then he decided it would be better to send K. withhim.  He should not be surprised if he could not understand the Italianat first, he would be able to very soon, and even if he really could notunderstand very much he said it was not so bad, as it was really not soimportant for the Italian to be understood.  And anyway, K.'s knowledgeof Italian was surprisingly good, the director was sure he would get byvery well.  And with that, it was time for K. to go.  He spent the timestill remaining to him with a dictionary, copying out obscure words hewould need to guide the Italian round the cathedral.  It was anextremely irksome task, servitors brought him the mail, bank staff camewith various queries and, when they saw that K. was busy, stood by thedoor and did not go away until he had listened to them, the deputydirector did not miss the opportunity to disturb K. and came infrequently, took the dictionary from his hand and flicked through itspages, clearly for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room openedeven clients would appear from the  half darkness and bow timidly to him- they wanted to attract his attention but were not sure whether he hadseen them - all this activity was circling around K. with him at itscentre while he compiled the list of words he would need, then lookedthem up in the dictionary, then wrote them out, then practised theirpronunciation and finally tried to learn them by heart.  The goodintentions he had had earlier, though, seemed to have left himcompletely, it was the Italian who had caused him all this effort andsometimes he became so angry with him that he buried the dictionaryunder some papers firmly intending to do no more preparation, but thenhe realised he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with theItalian without saying a word, so, in an even greater rage, hepulled the dictionary back out again.

At exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, therewas a telephone call for him, Leni wished him good morning and asked howhe was, K. thanked her hurriedly and told her it was impossible for himto talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "To the cathedral?" askedLeni.  "Yes, to the cathedral."  "What do you have to go to thecathedral for?" said Leni.  K. tried to explain it to her briefly, buthe had hardly begun when Leni suddenly said, "They're harassing you."One thing that K. could not bear was pity that he had not wanted orexpected, he took his leave of her with two words, but as he put thereceiver back in its place he said, half to himself and half to the girlon the other end of the line who could no longer hear him, "Yes, they'reharassing me."
By now the time was late and there was almost a danger he wouldnot be on time.  He took a taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment hehad remembered the album that he had had no opportunity to give to theItalian earlier and so took it with him now.  He held it on his kneesand drummed impatiently on it during the whole journey.  The rain hadeased off slightly but it was still damp chilly and dark, it would bedifficult to see anything in the cathedral but standing about on coldflagstones might well make K.'s chill much worse.  The square in frontof the cathedral was quite empty, K. remembered how even as a smallchild he had noticed that nearly all the houses in this narrow squarehad the curtains at their windows closed most of the time, althoughtoday, with the weather like this, it was more understandable.  Thecathedral also seemed quite empty, of course no-one would think of goingthere on a day like this.  K. hurried along both the side naves but sawno-one but an old woman who, wrapped up in a warm shawl, was kneeling ata picture of the Virgin Mary and staring up at it.  Then, in thedistance, he saw a church official who limped away through a doorway inthe wall.  K. had arrived on time, it had struck ten just as he wasentering the building, but the Italian still was not there.  K. wentback to the main entrance, stood there indecisively for a while, andthen walked round the cathedral in the rain in case the Italian waswaiting at another entrance.  He was nowhere to be found.  Could thedirector have misunderstood what time they had agreed on?  How couldanyone understand someone like that properly anyway?  Whatever hadhappened, K. would have to wait for him for at least half an hour.  Ashe was tired he wanted to sit down, he went back inside the cathedral,he found something like a small carpet on one of the steps, he moved itwith his foot to a nearby pew, wrapped himself up tighter in his coat,put the collar up and sat down.  To pass the time he opened the albumand flicked through the pages a little but soon had to give up as itbecame so dark that when he looked up he could hardly make out anythingin the side nave next to him.

In the distance there was a large triangle of candles flickeringon the main altar, K. was not certain whether he had seen them earlier.
Perhaps they had only just been lit.  Church staff creep silently aspart of their job, you don't notice them.  When K. happened to turnround he also saw a tall, stout candle attached to a column not farbehind him.  It was all very pretty, but totally inadequate toilluminate the pictures which were usually left in the darkness of theside altars, and seemed to make the darkness all the deeper.  It wasdiscourteous of the Italian not to come but it was also sensible of him,there would have been nothing to see, they would have had to contentthemselves with seeking out a few pictures with K.'s electric pockettorch and looking at them one small part at a time.  K. went over to anearby side chapel to see what they could have hoped for, he went up afew steps to a low marble railing and leant over it to look at the altarpicture by the light of his torch.  The eternal light hung disturbinglyin front of it.  The first thing that K. partly saw and partly guessedat was a large knight in armour who was shown at the far edge of thepainting.  He was leaning on his sword that he had stuck into the nakedground in front of him where only a few blades of grass grew here andthere.  He seemed to be paying close attention to something that wasbeing played out in front of him.  It was astonishing to see how hestood there without going any closer.  Perhaps it was his job to standguard.  It was a long time since K. had looked at any pictures and hestudied the knight for a long time even though he had continually toblink as he found it difficult to bear the green light of his torch.
Then when he moved the light to the other parts of the picture he foundan interment of Christ shown in the usual way, it was also acomparatively new painting.  He put his torch away and went back to hisplace.

There seemed to be no point in waiting for the Italian any longer,but outside it was certainly raining heavily, and as it was not so coldin the cathedral as K. had expected he decided to stay there for thetime being.  Close by him was the great pulpit, there were two plaingolden crosses attached to its little round roof which were lying almostflat and whose tips crossed over each other.  The outside of thepulpit's balustrade was covered in green foliage which continued down tothe column supporting it, little angels could be seen among the leaves,some of them lively and some of them still.  K. walked up to the pulpitand examined it from all sides, its stonework had been sculpted withgreat care, it seemed as if the foliage had trapped a deep darknessbetween and behind its leaves and held it there prisoner, K. lay hishand in one of these gaps and cautiously felt the stone, until then hehad been totally unaware of this pulpit's existence.  Then K. happenedto notice one of the church staff standing behind the next row of pews,he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in his lefthand and he was watching K.  Now what does he want? thought K.  Do Iseem suspicious to him?  Does he want a tip?  But when the man in thecassock saw that K. had noticed him he raised his right hand, a pinch ofsnuff still held between two fingers, and pointed in some vaguedirection.  It was almost impossible to understand what this behaviourmeant, K. waited a while longer but the man in the cassock did not stopgesturing with his hand and even augmented it by nodding his head.  "Nowwhat does he want?" asked K. quietly, he did not dare call out loudhere; but then he drew out his purse and pushed his way through thenearest pews to reach the man.  He, however, immediately gestured toturn down this offer, shrugged his shoulders and limped away.  As achild K. had imitated riding on a horse with the same sort of movementas this limp.  "This old man is like a child," thought K., "he doesn'thave the sense for anything more than serving in a church.  Look at theway he stops when I stop, and how he waits to see whether I'llcontinue."  With a smile, K. followed the old man all the way up theside nave and almost as far as the main altar, all this time the old mancontinued to point at something but K. deliberately avoided lookinground, he was only pointing in order to make it harder for K. to followhim.  Eventually, K. did stop following, he did not want to worry theold man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him awaycompletely in case the Italian turned up after all.

When he entered the central nave to go back to where he had leftthe album, he noticed a small secondary pulpit on a column almost nextto the stalls by the altar where the choir sat.  It was very simple,made of plain white stone, and so small that from a distance it lookedlike an empty niche where the statue of a saint ought to have been.  Itcertainly would have been impossible for the priest to take a full stepback from the balustrade, and, although there was no decoration on it,the top of the pulpit curved in exceptionally low so that a man ofaverage height would not be able stand upright and would have to remainbent forward over the balustrade.  In all, it looked as if it had beenintended to make the priest suffer, it was impossible to understand whythis pulpit would be needed as there were also the other ones availablewhich were large and so artistically decorated.

And K. would certainly not have noticed this little pulpit ifthere had not been a lamp fastened above it, which usually meant therewas a sermon about to be given.  So was a sermon to be given now?  Inthis empty church?  K. looked down at the steps which, pressed closeagainst the column, led up to the pulpit.  They were so narrow theyseemed to be there as decoration on the column rather than for anyone touse.  But under the pulpit - K. grinned in astonishment - there reallywas a priest standing with his hand on the handrail ready to climb thesteps and looking at K.  Then he nodded very slightly, so that K.
crossed himself and genuflected as he should have done earlier.  With alittle swing, the priest went up into the pulpit with short fast steps.
Was there really a sermon about to begin?  Maybe the man in the cassockhad not been really so demented, and had meant to lead K.'s way to thepreacher, which in this empty church would have been very necessary.
And there was also, somewhere in front of a picture of the Virgin Mary,an old woman who should have come to hear the sermon.  And if there wasto be a sermon why had it not been introduced on the organ?  But theorgan remained quiet and merely looked out weakly from the darkness ofits great height.

K. now considered whether he should leave as quickly as possible,if he did not do it now there would be no chance of doing so during thesermon and he would have to stay there for as long as it lasted, he hadlost so much time when he should have been in his office, there had longbeen no need for him to wait for the Italian any longer, he looked athis watch, it was eleven.  But could there really be a sermon given?Could K. constitute the entire congregation?  How could he when he wasjust a stranger who wanted to look at the church?  That, basically, wasall he was.  The idea of a sermon, now, at eleven o'clock, on a workday,in hideous weather, was nonsense.  The priest - there was no doubt thathe was a priest, a young man with a smooth, dark face - was clearlygoing up there just to put the lamp out after somebody had lit it bymistake.

But there had been no mistake, the priest seemed rather to checkthat the lamp was lit and turned it a little higher, then he slowlyturned to face the front and leant down on the balustrade gripping itsangular rail with both hands.  He stood there like that for a while and,without turning his head, looked around.  K. had moved back a long wayand leant his elbows on the front pew.  Somewhere in the church - hecould not have said exactly where - he could make out the man in thecassock hunched under his bent back and at peace, as if his work werecompleted.  In the cathedral it was now very quiet!  But K. would haveto disturb that silence, he had no intention of staying there; if it wasthe priest's duty to preach at a certain time regardless of thecircumstances then he could, and he could do it without K.'s takingpart, and K.'s presence would do nothing to augment the effect of it.
So K. began slowly to move, felt his way on tiptoe along the pew,arrived at the broad aisle and went along it without being disturbed,except for the sound of his steps, however light, which rang out on thestone floor and resounded from the vaulting, quiet but continuous at arepeating, regular pace.  K. felt slightly abandoned as, probablyobserved by the priest, he walked by himself between the empty pews, andthe size of the cathedral seemed to be just at the limit of what a mancould bear.  When he arrived back at where he had been sitting he didnot hesitate but simply reached out for the album he had left there andtook it with him.  He had nearly left the area covered by pews and wasclose to the  empty space between himself and the exit when, for thefirst time, he heard the voice of the priest.  A powerful andexperienced voice.  It pierced through the reaches of the cathedralready waiting for it!  But the priest was not calling out to thecongregation, his cry was quite unambiguous and there was no escape fromit, he called "Josef K.!"
K. stood still and looked down at the floor.  In theory he wasstill free, he could have carried on walking, through one of three darklittle wooden doors not far in front of him and away from there.  Itwould simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood butchose not to pay attention to it.  But if he once turned round he wouldbe trapped, then he would have acknowledged that he had understoodperfectly well, that he really was the Josef K. the priest had called toand that he was willing to follow.  If the priest had called out againK. would certainly have carried on out the door, but everything wassilent as K. also waited, he turned his head slightly as he wanted tosee what the priest was doing now.  He was merely standing in the pulpitas before, but it was obvious that he had seen K. turn his head.  If K.
did not now turn round completely it would have been like a childplaying hide and seek.  He did so, and the priest beckoned him with hisfinger.  As everything could now be done openly he ran - because ofcuriosity and the wish to get it over with - with long flying leapstowards the pulpit.  At the front pews he stopped, but to the priest hestill seemed too far away, he reached out his hand and pointed sharplydown with his finger to a place immediately in front of the pulpit.  AndK. did as he was told, standing in that place he had to bend his head along way back just to see the priest.  "You are Josef K.," said thepriest, and raised his hand from the balustrade to make a gesture whosemeaning was unclear.  "Yes," said K., he considered how freely he hadalways given his name in the past, for some time now it had been aburden to him, now there were people who knew his name whom he had neverseen before, it had been so nice first to introduce yourself and onlythen for people to know who you were.  "You have been accused," said thepriest, especially gently.  "Yes," said K., "so I have been informed.""Then you are the one I am looking for," said the priest.  "I am theprison chaplain."  "I see," said K.  "I had you summoned here," said thepriest, "because I wanted to speak to you."  "I knew nothing of that,"said K.  "I came here to show the cathedral to a gentleman from Italy.""That is beside the point," said the priest.  "What are you holding inyour hand?  Is it a prayer book?"  "No," answered K., "it's an album ofthe city's tourist sights."  "Put it down," said the priest.  K. threwit away with such force that it flapped open and rolled across thefloor, tearing its pages.  "Do you know your case is going badly?" askedthe priest.  "That's how it seems to me too," said K.  "I've expended alot of effort on it, but so far with no result.  Although I do stillhave some documents to submit."  "How do you imagine it will end?" askedthe priest.  "At first I thought it was bound to end well," said K.,"but now I have my doubts about it.  I don't know how it will end.  Doyou know?"  "I don't," said the priest, "but I fear it will end badly.
You are considered guilty.  Your case will probably not even go beyond aminor court.  Provisionally at least, your guilt is seen as proven.""But I'm not guilty," said K., "there's been a mistake.  How is it evenpossible for someone to be guilty.  We're all human beings here, onelike the other."  "That is true," said the priest, "but that is how theguilty speak."  "Do you presume I'm guilty too?" asked K.  "I make nopresumptions about you," said the priest.  "I thank you for that," saidK. "but everyone else involved in these proceedings has somethingagainst me and presumes I'm guilty.  They even influence those whoaren't involved.  My position gets harder all the time."  "You don'tunderstand the facts," said the priest, "the verdict does not comesuddenly, proceedings continue until a verdict is reached gradually.""I see," said K., lowering his head.  "What do you intend to do aboutyour case next?" asked the priest.  "I still need to find help," saidK., raising his head to see what the priest thought of this.  "There arestill certain possibilities I haven't yet made use of."  "You look fortoo much help from people you don't know," said the priestdisapprovingly, "and especially from women.  Can you really not seethat's not the help you need?"  "Sometimes, in fact quite often, I couldbelieve you're right," said K., "but not always.  Women have a lot ofpower.  If I could persuade some of the women I know to work togetherwith me then I would be certain to succeed.  Especially in a court likethis that seems to consist of nothing but woman-chasers.  Show theexamining judge a woman in the distance and he'll run right over thedesk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can."  Thepriest lowered his head down to the balustrade, only now did the roofover the pulpit seem to press him down.  What sort of dreadful weathercould it be outside?  It was no longer just a dull day, it was deepestnight.  None of the stained glass in the main window shed even a flickerof light on the darkness of the walls.  And this was the moment when theman in the cassock chose to put out the candles on the main altar, oneby one.  "Are you cross with me?" asked K.  "Maybe you don't know whatsort of court it is you serve."  He received no answer.  "Well, it'sjust my own experience," said K.  Above him there was still silence.  "Ididn't mean to insult you," said K.  At that, the priest screamed downat K.:  "Can you not see two steps in front of you?"  He shouted inanger, but it was also the scream of one who sees another fall and,shocked and without thinking, screams against his own will.

The two men, then, remained silent for a long time.  In thedarkness beneath him, the priest could not possibly have seen K.
distinctly, although K. was able to see him clearly by the light of thelittle lamp.  Why did the priest not come down?  He had not given asermon, he had only told K. a few things which, if he followed themclosely, would probably cause him more harm than good.  But the priestcertainly seemed to mean well, it might even be possible, if he wouldcome down and cooperate with him, it might even be possible for him toobtain some acceptable piece of advice that could make all thedifference, it might, for instance, be able to show him not so much toinfluence the proceedings but how to break free of them, how to evadethem, how to live away from them.  K. had to admit that this wassomething he had had on his mind quite a lot of late.  If the priestknew of such a possibility he might, if K. asked him, let him know aboutit, even though he was part of the court himself and even though, whenK. had criticised the court, he had held down his gentle nature andactually shouted at K.

"Would you not like to come down here?" asked K.  "If you're notgoing to give a sermon come down here with me."  "Now I can come down,"said the priest, perhaps he regretted having shouted at K.  As he tookdown the lamp from its hook he said, "to start off with I had to speakto you from a distance.  Otherwise I'm too easily influenced and forgetmy duty."
K. waited for him at the foot of the steps.  While he was still onone of the higher steps as he  came down them the priest reached out hishand for K. to shake.  "Can you spare me a little of your time?" askedK.  "As much time as you need," said the priest, and passed him thelittle lamp for him to carry.  Even at close distance the priest did notlose a certain solemnity that seemed to be part of his character.  "Youare very friendly towards me," said K., as they walked up and downbeside each other in the darkness of one of the side naves.  "That makesyou an exception among all those who belong to the court.  I can trustyou more than any of the others I've seen.  I can speak openly withyou."  "Don't fool yourself," said the priest.  "How would I be foolingmyself?" asked K.  "You fool yourself in the court," said the priest,"it talks about this self-deceit in the opening paragraphs to the law.
In front of the law there is a doorkeeper.  A man from the countrysidecomes up to the door and asks for entry.  But the doorkeeper says hecan't let him in to the law right now.  The man thinks about this, andthen he asks if he'll be able to go in later on.  'That's possible,'says the doorkeeper, 'but not now'.  The gateway to the law is open asit always is, and the doorkeeper has stepped to one side, so the manbends over to try and see in.  When the doorkeeper notices this helaughs and says, 'If you're tempted give it a try, try and go in eventhough I say you can't.  Careful though: I'm powerful.  And I'm only thelowliest of all the doormen.  But there's a doorkeeper for each of therooms and each of them is more powerful than the last.  It's more than Ican stand just to look at the third one.'  The man from the country hadnot expected difficulties like this, the law was supposed to beaccessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks moreclosely at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, sees his big hooked nose, hislong thin tartar-beard, and he decides it's better to wait until he haspermission to enter.  The doorkeeper gives him a stool and lets him sitdown to one side of the gate.  He sits there for days and years.  Hetries to be allowed in time and again and tires the doorkeeper with hisrequests.  The doorkeeper often questions him, asking about where he'sfrom and many other things, but these are disinterested questions suchas great men ask, and he always ends up by telling him he still can'tlet him in.  The man had come well equipped for his journey, and useseverything, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper.  He acceptseverything, but as he does so he says, 'I'll only accept this so thatyou don't think there's anything you've failed to do'.  Over many years,the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break.  He forgets aboutthe other doormen, and begins to think this one is the only thingstopping him from gaining access to the law. Over the first few years hecurses his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he becomes old, hejust grumbles to himself.  He becomes senile, and as he has come to knoweven the fleas in the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he hasbeen studying him he even asks them to help him and change thedoorkeeper's mind.  Finally his eyes grow dim, and he no longer knowswhether it's really getting darker or just his eyes that are deceivinghim.  But he seems now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shinefrom the darkness behind the door.  He doesn't have long to live now.
Just before he dies, he brings together all his experience from all thistime into one question which he has still never put to the doorkeeper.
He beckons to him, as he's no longer able to raise his stiff body.  Thedoorkeeper has to bend over deeply as the difference in their sizes haschanged very much to the disadvantage of the man.  'What is it you wantto know now?' asks the doorkeeper, 'You're insatiable.'  'Everyone wantsaccess to the law,' says the man, 'how come, over all these years, no-one but me has asked to be let in?'  The doorkeeper can see the man'scome to his end, his hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard,he shouts to him: 'Nobody else could have got in this way, as thisentrance was meant only for you.  Now I'll go and close it'."
"So the doorkeeper cheated the man," said K. immediately, who hadbeen captivated by the story.  "Don't be too quick," said the priest,"don't take somebody else's opinion without checking it.  I told you thestory exactly as it was written.  There's nothing in there aboutcheating."  "But it's quite clear," said K., "and your firstinterpretation of it was quite correct.  The doorkeeper gave him theinformation that would release him only when it could be of no moreuse."  "He didn't ask him before that," said the priest, "and don'tforget he was only a doorkeeper, and as doorkeeper he did his duty.""What makes you think he did his duty?" asked K., "He didn't.  It mighthave been his duty to keep everyone else away, but this man is who thedoor was intended for and he ought to have let him in."  "You're notpaying enough attention to what was written and you're changing thestory," said the priest.  "According to the story, there are twoimportant things that the doorkeeper explains about access to the law,one at the beginning, one at the end.  At one place he says he can'tallow him in now, and at the other he says this entrance was intendedfor him alone.  If one of the statements contradicted the other youwould be right and the doorkeeper would have cheated the man from thecountry.  But there is no contradiction.  On the contrary, the firststatement even hints at the second.  You could almost say the doorkeeperwent beyond his duty in that he offered the man some prospect of beingadmitted in the future.  Throughout the story, his duty seems to havebeen merely to turn the man away, and there are many commentators whoare surprised that the doorkeeper offered this hint at all, as he seemsto love exactitude and keeps strict guard over his position.  He staysat his post for many years and doesn't close the gate until the veryend, he's very conscious of the importance of his service, as he says,'I'm powerful,' he has respect for his superiors, as he says, 'I'm onlythe lowliest of the doormen', he's not talkative, as through all theseyears the only questions he asks are 'disinterested', he's notcorruptible, as when he's offered a gift he says, 'I'll only accept thisso that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do,' as far asfulfilling his duty goes he can be neither ruffled nor begged, as itsays about the man that, 'he tires the doorkeeper with his requests',even his external appearance suggests a pedantic character, the bighooked nose and the long, thin, black tartar-beard.  How could anydoorkeeper be more faithful to his duty?  But in the doorkeeper'scharacter there are also other features which might be very useful forthose who seek entry to the law, and when he hinted at some possibilityin the future it always seemed to make it clear that he might even gobeyond his duty.  There's no denying he's a little simple minded, andthat makes him a little conceited.  Even if all he said about his powerand the power of the other doorkeepers and how not even he could bearthe sight of them - I say even if all these assertions are right, theway he makes them shows that he's too simple and arrogant to understandproperly.  The commentators say about this that, 'correct understandingof a matter and a misunderstanding of the same matter are not mutuallyexclusive'.  Whether they're right or not, you have to concede that hissimplicity and arrogance, however little they show, do weaken hisfunction of guarding the entrance, they are defects in the doorkeeper'scharacter.  You also have to consider that the doorkeeper seems to befriendly by nature, he isn't always just an official.  He makes a jokeright at the beginning, in that he invites the man to enter at the sametime as maintaining the ban on his entering, and then he doesn't sendhim away but gives him, as it says in the text, a stool to sit on andlets him stay by the side of the door.  The patience with which he putsup with the man's requests through all these years, the littlequestioning sessions, accepting the gifts, his politeness when he putsup with the man cursing his fate even though it was the doorkeeper whocaused that fate - all these things seem to want to arouse our sympathy.
Not every doorkeeper would have behaved in the same way.  And finally,he lets the man beckon him and he bends deep down to him so that he canput his last question.  There's no more than some slight impatience -the doorkeeper knows everything's come to its end - shown in the words,'You're insatiable'.  There are many commentators who go even further inexplaining it in this way and think the words, 'you're insatiable' arean expression of friendly admiration, albeit with some condescension.
However you look at it the figure of the doorkeeper comes outdifferently from how you might think."  "You know the story better thanI do and you've known it for longer," said K.  They were silent for awhile.  And then K. said, "So you think the man was not cheated, doyou?"  "Don't get me wrong," said the priest, "I'm just pointing out thedifferent opinions about it.  You shouldn't pay too much attention topeople's opinions.  The text cannot be altered, and the various opinionsare often no more than an expression of despair over it.  There's evenone opinion which says it's the doorkeeper who's been cheated."  "Thatdoes seem to take things too far," said K.  "How can they argue thedoorkeeper has been cheated?"  "Their argument," answered the priest,"is based on the simplicity of the doorkeeper.  They say the doorkeeperdoesn't know the inside of the law, only the way into it where he justwalks up and down.  They see his ideas of what's inside the law asrather childish, and suppose he's afraid himself of what he wants tomake the man frightened of.  Yes, he's more afraid of it than the man,as the man wants nothing but to go inside the law, even after he's heardabout the terrible doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeeper whodoesn't want to go in, or at least we don't hear anything about it.  Onthe other hand, there are those who say he must have already been insidethe law as he has been taken on into its service and that could onlyhave been done inside.  That can be countered by supposing he could havebeen given the job of doorkeeper by somebody calling out from inside,and that he can't have gone very far inside as he couldn't bear thesight of the third doorkeeper.  Nor, through all those years, does thestory say the doorkeeper told the man anything about the inside, otherthan his comment about the other doorkeepers.  He could have beenforbidden to do so, but he hasn't said anything about that either.  Allthis seems to show he doesn't know anything about what the inside lookslike or what it means, and that that's why he's being deceived.  Buthe's also being deceived by the man from the country as he's this man'ssubordinate and doesn't know it.  There's a lot to indicate that hetreats the man as his subordinate, I expect you remember, but those whohold this view would say it's very clear that he really is hissubordinate.   Above all, the free man is superior to the man who has toserve another.  Now, the man really is free, he can go wherever hewants, the only thing forbidden to him is entry into the law and, what'smore, there's only one man forbidding him to do so - the doorkeeper.  Ifhe takes the stool and sits down beside the door and stays there all hislife he does this of his own free will, there's nothing in the story tosay he was forced to do it.  On the other hand, the doorkeeper is keptto his post by his employment, he's not allowed to go away from it andit seems he's not allowed to go inside either, not even if he wanted to.
Also, although he's in the service of the law he's only there for thisone entrance, therefore he's there only in the service of this one manwho the door's intended for.  This is another way in which he's hissubordinate.  We can take it that he's been performing this somewhatempty service for many years, through the whole of a man's life, as itsays that a man will come, that means someone old enough to be a man.
That means the doorkeeper will have to wait a long time before hisfunction is fulfilled, he will have to wait for as long as the manliked, who came to the door of his own free will.  Even the end of thedoorkeeper's service is determined by when the man's life ends, so thedoorkeeper remains his subordinate right to the end.  And it's pointedout repeatedly that the doorkeeper seems to know nothing of any of this,although this is not seen as anything remarkable, as those who hold thisview see the doorkeeper as deluded in a way that's far worse, a waythat's to do with his service.  At the end, speaking about the entrancehe says, 'Now I'll go and close it', although at the beginning of thestory it says the door to the law is open as it always is, but if it'salways open - always - that means it's open independently of thelifespan of the man it's intended for, and not even the doorkeeper willbe able to close it.  There are various opinions about this, some saythe doorkeeper was only answering a question or showing his devotion toduty or, just when the man was in his last moments, the doorkeeperwanted to cause him regret and sorrow.  There are many who agree that hewouldn't be able to close the door.  They even believe, at the end atleast, the doorkeeper is aware, deep down, that he's the man'ssubordinate, as the man sees the light that shines out of the entry tothe law whereas the doorkeeper would probably have his back to it andsays nothing at all to show there's been any change."  "That is wellsubstantiated," said K., who had been repeating some parts of thepriest's explanation to himself in a whisper.  "It is wellsubstantiated, and now I too think the doorkeeper must have beendeceived.  Although that does not mean I've abandoned what I thoughtearlier as the two versions are, to some extent, not incompatible. It'snot clear whether the doorkeeper sees clearly or is deceived.  I saidthe man had been cheated.  If the doorkeeper understands clearly, thenthere could be some doubt about it, but if the doorkeeper has beendeceived then the man is bound to believe the same thing.  That wouldmean the doorkeeper is not a cheat but so simple-minded that he ought tobe dismissed from his job immediately; if the doorkeeper is mistaken itwill do him no harm but the man will be harmed immensely."  "Thereyou've found another opinion," said the priest, "as there are many whosay the story doesn't give anyone the right to judge the doorkeeper.
However he might seem to us he is still in the service of the law, so hebelongs to the law, so he's beyond what man has a right to judge.  Inthis case we can't believe the doorkeeper is the man's subordinate.
Even if he has to stay at the entrance into the law his service makeshim incomparably more than if he lived freely in the world.  The man hascome to the law for the first time and the doorkeeper is already there.
He's been given his position by the law, to doubt his worth would be todoubt the law."  "I can't say I'm in complete agreement with this view,"said K. shaking his head, "as if you accept it you'll have to acceptthat everything said by the doorkeeper is true.  But you've alreadyexplained very fully that that's not possible."  "No," said the priest,"you don't need to accept everything as true, you only have to accept itas necessary."  "Depressing view," said K.  "The lie made into the ruleof the world."
K. said that as if it were his final word but it was not hisconclusion.  He was too tired to think about all the ramifications ofthe story, and the sort of thoughts they led him into were not familiarto him, unrealistic things, things better suited for officials of thecourt to discuss than for him.  The simple story had lost its shape, hewanted to shake it off, and the priest who now felt quite compassionateallowed this and accepted K.'s remarks without comment, even though hisview was certainly very different from K.'s.

In silence, they carried on walking for some time, K. stayed closebeside the priest without knowing where he was.  The lamp in his handhad long since gone out.  Once, just in front of him, he thought hecould see the statue of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it,although it quickly disappeared back into the darkness.  So that hewould not remain entirely dependent on the priest, K. asked him, "We'renow near the main entrance, are we?"  "No," said the priest, "we're along way from it.  Do you already want to go?"  K. had not thought ofgoing until then, but he immediately said,"Yes, certainly, I have to go.  I'm the chief clerk in a bank and thereare people waiting for me, I only came here to show a foreign businesscontact round the cathedral."  "Alright," said the priest offering himhis hand, "go then."  "But I can't find my way round in this darkness bymyself," said K.  "Go to your left as far as the wall," said the priest,"then continue alongside the wall without leaving it and you'll find away out."  The priest had only gone a few paces from him, but K. wasalready shouting loudly, "Please, wait!"  "I'm waiting," said thepriest.  "Is there anything else you want from me?" asked K.  "No," saidthe priest.  "You were so friendly to me earlier on," said K., "and youexplained everything, but now you abandon me as if I were nothing toyou."  "You have to go," said the priest.
"Well, yes," said K., "you need to understand that."  "First, you needto understand who I am," said the priest.  "You're the prison chaplain,"said K., and went closer to the priest, it was not so important for himto go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could very wellstay where he was.  "So that means I belong to the court," said thepriest.  "So why would I want anything from you?  the court doesn't wantanything from you.  It accepts you when you come and it lets you go whenyou leave."



Chapter TenEnd
The evening before K.'s thirty-first birthday - it was about nineo'clock in the evening, the time when the streets were quiet - two mencame to where he lived.  In frock coats, pale and fat, wearing top hatsthat looked like they could not be taken off their heads.  After somebrief formalities at the door of the flat when they first arrived, thesame formalities were repeated at greater length at K.'s door.  He hadnot been notified they would be coming, but K. sat in a chair near thedoor, dressed in black as they were, and slowly put on new gloves whichstretched tightly over his fingers and behaved as if he were expectingvisitors.  He immediately stood up and looked at the gentlemeninquisitively.  "You've come for me then, have you?" he asked.  Thegentlemen nodded, one of them indicated the other with the top hand nowin his hand.  K. told them he had been expecting a different visitor.
He went to the window and looked once more down at the dark street.
Most of the windows on the other side of the street were also darkalready, many of them had the curtains closed.  In one of the windows onthe same floor where there was a light on, two small children could beseen playing with each other inside a playpen, unable to move from wherethey were, reaching out for each other with their little hands.  "Someancient, unimportant actors - that's what they've sent for me," said K.
to himself, and looked round once again to confirm this to himself.
"They want to sort me out as cheaply as they can."  K. suddenly turnedround to face the two men and asked, "What theatre do you play in?""Theatre?" asked one of the gentlemen, turning to the other forassistance and pulling in the corners of his mouth.  The other made agesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggling with someorganism causing him trouble.  "You're not properly prepared to answerquestions," said K. and went to fetch his hat.

As soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen wanted to takeK.'s arms, but K. said "Wait till we're in the street, I'm not ill."But they waited only until the front door before they took his arms in away that K. had never experienced before.   They kept their shouldersclose behind his, did not turn their arms in but twisted them around theentire length of K.'s arms and took hold of his hands with a grasp thatwas formal, experienced and could not be resisted.  K. was held stiffand upright between them, they formed now a single unit so that if anyone of them had been knocked down all of them must have fallen.  Theyformed a unit of the sort that normally can be formed only by matterthat is lifeless.

Whenever they passed under a lamp K. tried to see his companionsmore clearly, as far as was possible when they were pressed so closetogether, as in the dim light of his room this had been hardly possible.
"Maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double chins.
The cleanliness of their faces disgusted him.  He could see the handsthat cleaned them, passing over the corners of their eyes, rubbing attheir upper lips, scratching out the creases on those chins.

When K. noticed that, he stopped, which meant the others had tostop too; they were at the edge of an open square, devoid of people butdecorated with flower beds.  "Why did they send you, of all people!" hecried out, more a shout than a question.  The two gentleman clearly knewno answer to give, they waited, their free arms hanging down, likenurses when the patient needs to rest.  "I will go no further," said K.
as if to see what would happen.  The gentlemen did not need to make anyanswer, it was enough that they did not loosen their grip on K. andtried to move him on, but K. resisted them.  "I'll soon have no need ofmuch strength, I'll use all of it now," he thought.   He thought of theflies that tear their legs off struggling to get free of the flypaper.
"These gentleman will have some hard work to do".

Just then, Miss Bürstner came up into the square in front of themfrom the steps leading from a small street at a lower level.  It was notcertain that it was her, although the similarity was, of course, great.
But it did not matter to K. whether it was certainly her anyway, he justbecame suddenly aware that there was no point in his resistance.  Therewould be nothing heroic about it if he resisted, if he now causedtrouble for these gentlemen, if in defending himself he sought to enjoyhis last glimmer of life.  He started walking, which pleased thegentlemen and some of their pleasure conveyed itself to him.  Now theypermitted him to decide which direction they took, and he decided totake the direction that followed the young woman in front of them, notso much because he wanted to catch up with her, nor even because hewanted to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that hewould not forget the reproach she represented for him.   "The only thingI can do now," he said to himself, and his thought was confirmed by theequal length of his own steps with the steps of the two others, "theonly thing I can do now is keep my common sense and do what's neededright till the end.  I always wanted to go at the world and try and dotoo much, and even to do it for something that was not too cheap.  Thatwas wrong of me.  Should I now show them I learned nothing from facingtrial for a year?  Should I go out like someone stupid?  Should I letanyone say, after I'm gone, that at the start of the proceedings Iwanted to end them, and that now that they've ended I want to start themagain?  I don't want anyone to say that.  I'm grateful they sent theseunspeaking, uncomprehending men to go with me on this journey, and thatit's been left up to me to say what's necessary".

Meanwhile, the young woman had turned off into a side street, butK. could do without her now and let his companions lead him.  All threeof them now, in complete agreement, went over a bridge in the light ofthe moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each littlemovement made by K. as he moved slightly towards the edge and directedthe group in that direction as a single unit.  The moonlight glitteredand quivered in the water, which divided itself around a small islandcovered in a densely-piled mass of foliage and trees and bushes.
Beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel paths with comfortablebenches where K. had stretched himself out on many summer's days.  "Ididn't actually want to stop here," he said to his companions, shamed bytheir compliance with his wishes.  Behind K.'s back one of them seemedto quietly criticise the other for the misunderstanding about stopping,and then they went on.  They went on up through several streets wherepolicemen were walking or standing here and there; some in the distanceand then some very close.   One of them with a bushy moustache, his handon the  grip of his sword, seemed to have some purpose in approachingthe group, which was hardly unsuspicious.  The two gentlemen stopped,the policeman seemed about to open his mouth, and then K. drove hisgroup forcefully forward.  Several times he looked back cautiously tosee if the policeman was following; but when they had a corner betweenthemselves and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen,despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him.

In this way they quickly left the built up area and foundthemselves in the fields which, in this part of town, began almostwithout any transition zone.   There was a quarry, empty and abandoned,near a building which was still like those in the city.  Here the menstopped, perhaps because this had always been their destination orperhaps because they were too exhausted to run any further.  Here theyreleased their hold on K., who just waited in silence, and took theirtop hats off while they looked round the quarry and wiped the sweat offtheir brows with their handkerchiefs.  The moonlight lay everywhere withthe natural peace that is granted to no other light.

After exchanging a few courtesies about who was to carry out thenext tasks - the gentlemen did not seem to have been allocated specificfunctions - one of them went to K. and took his coat, his waistcoat, andfinally his shirt off him.  K. made an involuntary shiver, at which thegentleman gave him a gentle, reassuring tap on the back.  Then hecarefully folded the things up as if they would still be needed, even ifnot in the near future.  He did not want to expose K. to the chillynight air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and walkedup and down with him a little way while the other gentleman looked roundthe quarry for a suitable place.  When he had found it he made a signand the other gentleman escorted him there.  It was near the rockface,there was a stone lying there that had broken loose.  The gentlemen satK. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settled his headdown on the top of it.  Despite all the effort they went to, and despiteall the co-operation shown by K., his demeanour seemed very forced andhard to believe.  So one of the gentlemen asked the other to grant him ashort time while he put K. in position by himself, but even that didnothing to make it better.  In the end they left K. in a position thatwas far from the best of the ones they had tried so far.  Then one ofthe gentlemen opened his frock coat and from a sheath hanging on a beltstretched across his waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edgedbutcher's knife which he held up in the light to test its sharpness.
The repulsive courtesies began once again, one of them passed the knifeover K. to the other, who then passed it back over K. to the first.  K.
now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as it passed from handto hand above him and thrust it into himself.  But he did not do it,instead he twisted his neck, which was still free, and looked around.
He was not able to show his full worth, was not able to take all thework from the official bodies, he lacked the rest of the strength heneeded and this final shortcoming was the fault of whoever had denied itto him.  As he looked round, he saw the top floor of the building nextto the quarry.  He saw how a light flickered on and the two halves of awindow opened out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and thedistance, leant suddenly far out from it and stretched his arms out evenfurther.  Who was that?  A friend?  A good person?  Somebody who wastaking part?  Somebody who wanted to help?  Was he alone?  Was iteveryone?  Would anyone help?  Were there objections that had beenforgotten?  There must have been some.  The logic cannot be refuted, butsomeone who wants to live will not resist it.  Where was the judge he'dnever seen?  Where was the high court he had never reached?  He raisedboth hands and spread out all his fingers.

But the hands of one of the gentleman were laid on K.'s throat,while the other pushed the knife deep into his heart and twisted itthere, twice.  As his eyesight failed, K. saw the two gentlemen cheek bycheek, close in front of his face, watching the result. "Like a dog!" hesaid, it was as if the shame of it should outlive him.