I T was late in the evening when K. arrived. Thevillage was deep in snow. The Castle hill washidden, veiled in mist afld darkness, nor was there evena glimmer of light to show that a castle was there. Onthe wooden bridge leading from the main road to thevillage K. stood for a long time gazing into the illusoryemptiness above him. 

Then he went on to find quarters for the night. Theinn was still awake, and although the landlord couldnot provide a room and was upset by such a late andunexpected arrival, he was willing to let K. sleep on abag of straw in the parlour. K. accepted the offer. 
Some peasants were still sitting over their beer, buthe did not want to talk, and after himself fetching thebag of straw from the attic, lay down beside the stove. 
It was a warm corner, the peasants were quiet, andletting his weary eyes stray over them he soon fell asleep. 

But very shortly he was awakened. A young mandressed like a townsman, with the face of an actor, hiseyes narrow and his eyebrows strongly marked, wasstanding beside him along with the landlord. Thepeasants were still in the room, and a few had turnedtheir chairs round so as to see and hear better. Theyoung man apologised very courteously for havingawakened K., introducing himself as the son of theCastellan, and then said : “ This village belongs to*the Castle, and whoever lives here or passes the nightHfere does so in a manner of speaking in the Castle itself. 
Nobody may do that without the Count’s permission. 



12

THE CASTLE

But you have no such permit, or at least you haveproduced none/*
K, had half raised himself and now, smoothing downhis hair and looking up at the two men, he said ; Whatvillage is this I have wandered into? Is there, a castlehere ? ”
Most certainly,** replied the young man slowly,while here and there a head was shaken^ over K/sremark, ‘‘ the castle of my lord the Count West-west.**
''And must one have a permit to sleep here?**asked K., as if he wished to assure himself that whathe had heard was not a dream. 

" One must have a permit,** was the reply, and therewas an ironical contempt for K. in the young man*sgesture as he stretched out his arm and appealed tothe others, " Or must one not have a permit ? **
" Well, then, 1*11 have to go and get one,** said K. 
yawning and pushing his blanket away as if to rise up. 

" And from whom, pray ? ** asked the young man. 

" From the Count,** said K., " that*s the only thingto be done/*
" A permit from the Count in the middle of the night! **cried the young man, stepping back a pace. 

“ Is that impossible ? ** enquired K. coolly. ** Thenwhy did you waken me ? **
At this the young man flew into a passion. " None ofyour guttersnipe manners ! ** he cried. I insist onrespect for the Count*s authority I I woke you up to in-form you that you must quit the Count's territory at once.**
“ Enough of this fooling,** said K. in a markedlyquiet voice, laying himself down again and pulling upthe blanket. " \ou*re going a little too far, my good "fellow, and I'E have something to say to-morrow abotityour conduct. The landlord here and those other


THE CASTLE

13
gentlemen will bear me out if necessary. Let me tellyou that I am the Land Surveyor whom the Count isexpecting. My assistants are coming on to-morrowin a* carriage with the apparatus. I did not want tomiss the chance of a walk through the snow, but un-fortunately lost my way several times and so arrivedvery late. That it was too late to present myself at theCastle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. 
That is why I have made shift with this bed for thenight, where, to put it mildly, you have had the dis-courtesy to disturb me. That is all I have to say. 
Good night, gentlemen.** And K. turned over on hisside ^towards the stove. 

Land Surveyor ? *' he heard the hesitating questionbehind his back, and then there was a general silence. 
But the young man soon recovered his assurance,and lowering his voice, sufficiently to appear considerateof K.*s sleep while yet speaking loud enough to beclearly heard, said to the landlord : '' 1*11 ring up andenquire.** So there was a telephone in this villageinn ? They had everything up to the mark. Theparticular instance surprised K., but on the whole hehad really expected it. It appeared that the telephonewas placed almost over his head and in his drowsycondition he had overlooked it. If the young manmust needs telephone he could not, even with the bestintentions, avoid disturbing K., the only question waswhether K. would let him do so ; he decided to allowit. In that case, however, there was no sense in pre-tending to sleep, and so he turned on his back again. 
He could see the peasants putting their heads together ;•the arrival of a Land Surveyor was no small event. Thedoor into the kitchen had been opened, and blockingthe whole doorway stood the imposing figure of the


THE CASTLE

landlady, to whom the landlord was advancing ontiptoe in order to tell her what was happening. Andnow the conversation began on the telephone. TheCastellan was asleep, but an under-castellan, one ofthe under-castellans, a certain Herr Fritz, was ayailable. 
The young man, announcing himself as Schwarzer,reported that he had found K., a disreputable-lookingman in the thirties, sleeping calmly on a bag of strawwith a minute rucksack for pillow and a knotty stickwithin reach. He had naturally suspected the fellow,and as tlic landlord had obviously neglected his duty he,Schwarzer, had felt bound to investigate the matter. 
He had roused the man, questioned him, and /dulywarned him oif the Count's territory, all of which K. 
had taken with an ill grace, perhaps with some justifica-tion, as it eventually turned out, for he claimed to be aLand Surveyor engaged by the Count. Of course, tosay the least of it, that was a statement which requiredoiiicial confirmation, and so Schwarzer begged HerrI’ritz to enquire in the Central Bureau if a LandSurveyor were really expected, and to telephone theansw er at once. 

I'hcn there was silence while Fritz was making
enquiries up there and the young man was waiting forthe answer. K. did not change his position, did noteven once turn round, seemed quite indifferent andstared into space. Schwarzer's report, in its combina-tion of malice and prudence, gave him an idea of themeasure of diplomac)' in which even underlings in theCastle like Schwarzer were versed. Nor were theyremiss in industr)\ the Central Office had a night
service. And apparently answered questions quickly, *too, for Fritz v\'as already ringing. His reply seemed
briol enough, for Schwarzer hung up the receiver


THE CASTLE

15
immediately, crying angrily : Just what I said !
Not a trace of a Land Surveyor. A common, lyingtramp, and probably worse/' For a moment K. 
thought that all of them, Schwarzer, the peasants, thelandlord and the landlady, were going to fall upon himin a bddy, and to escape at least the first shock of theirassault he crawled right underneath the blanket. Butthe telephyne rang agaip, and with a special insistence,it seemed to K. Slowly he put out his head. Althoughit was improbable that this message also concerned K. 
they all stopped short and Schwarzer took up thereceiver once more. He listened to a fairly long state-ment, and then said in a low voice : '‘A mistake, is it ?I'm' sorry to hear that. The head of the departmenthimself said so ? Very queer, very queer. How amI to explain it all to the Land Surveyor ? "
K. pricked up his ears. So the Castle had recog-nised him as the Land Surveyor, That was unpro-pitious for him, on the one hand, for it meant thatthe Castle was well informed about him, had estimatedall the probable chances, and was taking up the chal-lenge with a smile. On the other hand, however, itwas quite propitious, for if his interpretation were rightthey had underestimated his strength, and he wouldhave more freedom of action than he had dared to hope. 
And if they expected to cow him by their lofty superior-ity in recognising him as Land Surveyor, they weremistaken ; it made his skin prickle a little, that was all. 

He waved off Schwarzer who was timidly approach-ing him, and refused an urgent invitation to transferhimself into the landlord's own room ; he only accepteda warm drink from the landlord and from the landlady% basin to wash in, a piece of soap, and a towel. Hedid not even have to ask that the room should be


THE CASTLE

l6
cleared, for all the men flocked out with averted faceslest he should recognise them again next day. Thelamp was blown out, and he was left in peace at last. 
He slept deeply until morning, scarcely disturbed byrats scuttling past once or twice. 

After breakfast, which, according to his host, 'was tobe paid for by the Castle, together with all the otherexpenses of his board and lodging, he prepared to goout immediately into the village. But since the landlord,to whom he had been very curt because of his behaviourthe jTcccding night, kept circling around him in dumbentreaty, he took pity on the man and asked him to sitdown for a while. 

** I haven’t met the Count yet,” said K., ” but hepays well for good work, doesn’t he ? When a manlike me travels so far from home he wants to go backwith something in his pockets.”
” 'rhere’s no need for the gentleman to worry about thatkind of thing ; nobody complains of being badly paid.”
” Well,” said K., ” I’m not one of your timid people,and can give a piece of my mind even to a Count, butof course it’s much better to have everything settled upwithout any trouble.”
I'lic landlord sat opposite K. on the rim of the window-ledge, not daring to take a more comfortable seat, andkept on gazing at K. with an anxious look in his largebrown eyes. He had thrust his company on K. athrst, but now it seemed that he was eager to escape. 
Was he afraid of being cross-questioned about theCount ? Was he afraid of some indiscretion on thepart of the “gentleman” whom he took K. to be?K. must divert his attention. He looked at the clock,and said : ’ My assistants should be arriving soon. 

Will you be able to put them up here ? ”


THE CASTLE

17

'' Certainly, sir," he said, " but won't they be stayingwith you up at the Castle ? "
Was the landlord so willing, then, to give up pro-spective customers, and K. in particular, whom he* sounconditionally transferred to the Castle ?
' I hat's not at all certain yet," said K. "I mustfirst find out what work I am expected to do. If I haveto work^down here, for instance, it would be moresensible to lodge down here. I'm afraid, too, that thelife in the Castle wouldn't suit me. I like to be my ownmaster."
"You don't know the Castle," said the landlordquietly. 

*" Of course," replied K., " one shouldn't judgeprematurely. All that I know at present about theCastle is that the people there know how to choose agood Land Surveyor. Perhaps it has other attractionsas well." And he stood up in order to rid the landlordof his presence, since the man was biting his lip un-easily. His confidence was not to be lightly won. 

As K. was going out he noticed a dark portrait in adim frame on the wall. He had already observed itfrom his couch by the stove, but from that distance hehad not been able to distinguish any details and hadthought that it was only a plain back to the frame. Butit was a picture after all, as now appeared, the bustportrait of a man about fifty. His head was sunk solow upon his breast that his eyes were scarcely visible,and the weight of the high, heavy forehead and thestrong hooked nose seemed to have borne the headdown. Because of this pose the man's full beard waspressed in at the chin and spread out farther down. 
His left hand was buried in his luxuriant hair, butseemed incapable of supporting the head. " Who is


THE CASTLE

l8
that?” asked K., ” the Count?” He was standingbefore the portrait and did not look round at the land-lord. ” No,” said the latter, ” the Castellan.” ” Ahandsome castellan, indeed, said K., a pity that hehas such an ill-bred son.” ” No, no,” said the landlord,drawing K. a little towards him and whispering m hisear, ” Schwarzer exaggerated yesterday, his father isonly an under-castellan, and one of the lowest, too.”At that moment the landlord struck K. as a very child. 
” The villain ! ” said K. with a laugh, but the landlordinstead of laughing said, ” Even his father is powerful.”” Cict along with you,” said K., ” you think everyone|'>owerful. Me too, perhaps?” ” No,” he replied,timidly yet seriously, ” I don't think you powerful:”” You’re a keen observer,” said K., ” for between youand me I’m not really powerful. And consequently Isuppose I liave no less respect for the powerful than youhave, only I’m not so honest as you and am not alwayswilling to acknowledge it.” And K. gave the landlorda tap on the cheek to hearten him and awaken hisfriendliness. It made him smile a little. He wasactually young, with that soft and almost beardlessiace of Ins ; how had he come to have that massive,elderly wife, who could be seen through a small windowbustling about the kitchen with her elbows stickingout ? K. did not want to force his confidence anylurtluT, however, nor to scare aw'ay the smile he hadat last evoked. So he only signed to him to open thedoor, and went out into the brilliant winter morning. 

Now, he could sec the Castle above him clearlydefined in the glittering air, its outline made still moredelinite by the moulding of snow covering it in a thinlayer. 1 here seemed to be much less snow up thereon the hill than down in the village, where K. found


THE CASTLE

19
progress as laborious as on the main road the previousday. Here the heavy snowdrifts reached right up to thecottage windows and began again on the low roofs, butuf> on the hill everything soared light and free into theair, ^ at least so it appeared from down below. 

On the whole this distant prospect of the Castlesatisfied K."s expectations. It was neither an oldstronghold nor a nev* mansion, but a rambling pileconsisting of innumerable small buildings closely packedtogether and of one or two storeys ; if K. had not knownthat it was a castle he might have taken it for a littletown. There was only one tower as far as he couldsee, whether it belonged to a dwelling-house or achurch he could not determine. Swarms of crowswere circling round it. 

With his eyes fixed on the Castle K. went on farther,thinking of nothing else at all. But on approachingit he was disappointed in the Castle ; it was after allonly a wretched-looking town, a huddle of villagehouses, whose sole merit, if any, lay in being built ofstone, but the plaster had long since flaked off and thestone seemed to be crumbling away. K. had a fleetingrecollection of his native town. It was hardly inferiorto this so-called Castle, and if it were merely a questionof enjoying the view it was a pity to have come so far. 
K. would have done better to visit his native townagain, which he had not seen for such a long time. 
And in his mind he compared the church tower at homewith the tower above him. The church tower, firmin line, soaring unfalteringly to its tapering point,topped with red tiles and broad in the roof, an earthlybuilding — what else can men build ? — but with a• loftier goal than the humble dwelling-houses, and aclearer meaning than the muddle of everyday life. The


10

THE CASTLE

tower above him here — the only one visible — ^the towerof a house, as was now apparent, perhaps of the mainbuilding, was uniformly round, part of it graciouslymantled with ivy, pierced by small windows thsitglittered in the sun, a somewhat maniacal glitter, 'andtopped by what looked like an attic, with battlementsthat were irregular, broken, fumbling, as if designed bythe trembling or careless hand a child, clearly out-lined against the blue. It was as if a melancholy-madtenant who ought to have been kept locked in the top-most chamber of his house had burst through the roofand lifted himself up to the gaze of the world. 

Again K. came to a stop, as if in standing still hehad more power of judgment. But he was disturbed. 
Behind the village church where he had stopped — it wasreally only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additionsso as to accommodate the parishioners — was the school. 
A long, low building, combining remarkably a look ofgreat age with a provisional appearance, it lay behinda lonccd-in garden which was now a field of snow. 
The children were just coming out with their teacher. 
They thronged round him, all gazing up at him andchattering without a break so rapidly that K. couldnot follow what they said. The teacher, a small youngman witli narrow shoulders and a very upright carriagewiiich yet did not make him ridiculous, had alreadyfixed K. with his eyes from the distance, naturallyenough, for apart from the school-children there wasnot another human being in sight. Being the stranger,K. made the first advance, especially as the other wasan authoritative-looking little man. and said ; “ Goodinorning, sir. As if by one accord the children fellsilent, perhaps the master liked to have a sudden still- ■ness as a preparation for his words. " You are looking


THE CASTLE

21

at the Castle ? he asked more gently than K. hadexpected, but with an inflection that denoted dis-approval of K/s occupation. ** Yes," said K. " I. ama stranger here, I came to the village only last night."" Y\u don't like the Castle ? " returned the teacherquickly. " What ? " countered K., a little taken aback,and repeated the question in a modified form. " DoI like th^ Castle ? Why do you assume that I don't likeit ? " " Strangers never do," said the teacher. To
avoid saying the wrong thing K. changed the subjectand asked : "I suppose you know the Count ? " " No,"said the teacher turning away. But K. would not bepat off and asked again : " What, you don't know theCount ? " " Why should I ? " replied the teacher in a
low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please
remember that there are innocent children present."K. took this as a justification for asking : " Might I cometo pay you a visit one day, sir ? I am to be staying herefor some time and already feel a little lonely. I don'tfit in with the peasants nor, I imagine, with the Castle."" There is no difference between the peasantry andthe Castle," said the teacher. " Maybe," said K.," that doesn't alter my position. Can I pay you a visitone day ? " "I live in Swan Street at the butcher's."That was assuredly more of a statement than an in-vitation, but K. said : " Right, I'll come." The
teacher nodded and moved on with his batch ofchildren, who began to scream again immediately. 
They soon vanished in a steeply descending by-street. 

But K. was disconcerted, irritated by the conversation. 
For the first time since his arrival he felt really tired. 
The long journey he had made seemed at first to haveimposed no strain upon him — how quietly he hadsauntered through the days, step by step ! — but now


22

THE CASTLE

the consequences of his exertion were making them-selves felt, and at the wrong time, too. He felt irre-sistibly drawn to seek out new acquaintances, bur eachnew acquaintance only seemed to increase his weariness. 
If he forced himself in his present condition to go on atleast as far as the Castle entrance, he would have donemore than enough. 

So he resumed his walk, but» the way prefixed long. 
For the street lie was in, the main street of the village,did not lead up to the Castle hill, it only made towardsit and then, as if deliberately, turned aside, and thoughit did not lead away from the Castle it got no nearerto it cither. At every turn K. expected the road todouble back to the Castle, and only because of thisexpectation did he go on ; he was flatly unwillingtired as he was, to leave the street, and he was alsoama/cd at the length of the village, which seemed tohave no end ; again and again the same little houses,and frost-bound window-panes and snow and theentire absence of liuman beings — but at last he torehimself away from the obsession of the street and escapedinto a small sidc-lanc, where the snow was still deeperand the exertion of lifting one’s feet clear was fatiguing ,*he broke into a sweat, suddenly came to a stop, andcould not go on. 

Well, he w\is not on a desert island, there werecottages to right and left of him. He made a snow-ball and threw it at a window. The door openedimmediately — the first door that had opened duringthe w'hole length of the village — and there appearedan old peasant in a brown fur jacket, with his headcocked to one side, a frail and kindly figure. ** MayI come into your house for a little ? ” asked K., Tmveiy tired. He did not hear tlie old man’s reply, but


THE CASTLE

23
thankfully observed that a plank was pushed outtowards him to rescue him from the snow, and in a fewsteps he was in the kitchen. 

A large kitchen, dimly lit. Anyone coming in fromDutsi^ie could make out nothing at first. K. stumbledover a washing-tub, a woman's hand steadied him. 
The crying of children came loudly from one comer. 
From anoflier steam was welling out and turning thedim light into darkness. K. stood as if in the clouds. 

He must be drunk," said somebody. " Who are^ou ? " cried a hectoring voice, and then obviously tothe old man : " Why did you let him in ? Are we tolet. in everybody that wanders about in the street ? "
I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying tojustify himself before this still invisible personage. " Oh,it's the Land Surveyor," said a woman's voice, and then:ame a complete silence. "You know me, then ? "asked K. " Of course," said the same voice curtly. 
The fact that he was known did not seem to be arecommendation. 

At last the steam thinned a little, and K. was able^adually to make things out. It seemed to be ageneral washing-day. Near the door clothes werebeing washed. But the steam was coming from another:orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. had:ver seen, as wide as two beds, two men were bathingin steaming water. But still more astonishing, although3ne could not say what was so astonishing about it. 
was the scene in the right-hand comer. From a largeDpening, the only one in the back wall, a pale snowy'ight came in, apparently from the courtyard, andyave a gleam as of silk to the dress of a woman who wasilmost reclining in a high arm-chair. She was sucklingin infant at her breast. Several children were playing


THE CASTLE

24
£iroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but sheseemed to be of another class, although of course illnessancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement*
** Sit down ! ** said one of the men, who had a fullbeard and breathed heavily through his mouth »whichalways hung open, pointing— it was a furmy sight — withhis wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle,and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face ashe did so. On the settle the old man who had ad-mitted K. was already sitting, sunk in vacancy* K. wasthankful to find a scat at last. Nobody paid anyfurther attention to him* The woman at the washing-tub, young, plump and fair, sang in a low voice as 6heworked, the men stamped and rolled about in the bath,the children tried to get closer to them but were con-stantly driven back by mighty splashes of water whichfell on K., too, and the woman in the arm-chair lay asif lifeless staring at the roof without even a glancetowards the child at her bosom. 

She made a beautiful, sad, fixed picture, and K. 
looked at her for wdiat must have been a long time ;then he must have fallen asleep, for when a loud voiceroused him he found that his head was lying on theold man's sliouldcr. The men had finished with thetub— in w'liich the children were now wallowing incharge of the fair-haired woman — and were standingfully dressed before K. It appeared that the hectoringone with the full beard was the less important of thetw'o. The other, a still slow-thinking man who kepthis head bent, was not taller than his companion andhad a much smaller beard, but he was broader in theshoulders and had a broad face as well, and he it waswho said : You can't stay here, sir. Excuse the dis-courtesy. I don t want to stay," said K., I only


THE CASTLE

25
wanted to rest a little. I have rested, and now I shallgo/' You're probably surprised at our lack ofhosj^itality," said the man, ‘‘ but hospitality is not ourcustom here, we have no use for visitors." SomewhatrefresNed by his sleep, his perceptions somewhatquickened, K. was pleased by the man's frankness. Hefelt less constrained, poked with his stick here andthere, appfoached the owoman in the arm-chair, andnoted that he was physically the biggest man in the room. 

"To be sure," said K., " what use would you havefor visitors ? But still you need one now and then, me,for example, the Land Surveyor." " I don't knowabqut that," replied the man slowly. " If you've beenasked to come you're probably needed, that's anexceptional case, but we small people stick to ourtradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no,"said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybodyhere." And taking them all by surprise he made anadroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. 
Out of weary blue eyes she looked at him, a trans-parent silk kerchief hung down to the middle of herforehead, the infant was asleep on her bosom. " Whoare you ? " asked K., and disdainfully — whether con-temptuous of K. or her own answer was not clear — shereplied ; "A girl from the Castle."
It had only taken a second or so, but already thetwo men were at either side of K. and were pushinghim towards the door, as if there were no other meansof persuasion, silently, but putting out all their strength. 
Something in this procedure delighted the old man, andhe clapped his hands. The woman at the bath-tublaughed too, and the children suddenly shouted like mad. 
• K. was soon out in the street, and from the thresholdthe two men surveyed him. Snow was again falling. 



THE CASTLE

26
yet the sky seemed a little brighter. The bearded mancried impatiently : Where do you want to go ? Thisis the way to the Castle, and that to the village."' K. 
made no reply to him, but turned to the other, whoin spite of his shyness seemed to him the more amiableof the two, and said : Who are you ? Whom have
I to thank for sheltering me ? " ** 1 am the tanner
Lnseinann," was the answer, “abut you ow^ thanks tonobody.** “ All right,** said K., “ perhaps we*ll meetagain.** ** I don*t suppose so,** said the man. At thatmoment the other cried, with wave of his hand ; “ Goodmorning, Arthur ; good morning, Jeremiah ! ** K. 
turned round ; so there were really people to be seenin the village streets I From the direction of the Castlecame two young men of medium height, both veryslim, in tight-fitting clothes, and like each other in theirfeatures. Altliough their skin was a dusky brown theblackness of their little pointed beards was actuallystriking by contrast. Considering the state of theroad, they were v^'alking at a great pace, their slim legskeeping time. “ Where are you off to? ** shouted thel^earded man. One had to shout to them, they weregoing so fast and they would not stop. ** On business,**(hey slioutcd back, laughing. ** Where ? ** ** At the
mn." “ I'm going there too,** yelled K. suddenly,louder than all the rest ; he felt a strong desire toaccompany them, not that he expected much fromtheir acquaintance, but they were obviously good andjolly companions. They heard him, but only nodded,and were already out of sight. 

K. was still stanching in the snow, and was littleinclined to extricate his feet only for the sake of plungingthem in again ; the tanner and his comrade, satisfiedwith having finally got rid of him, edged slowly into the


THE CASTLE

27

house through the door which was now barely ajar,casting backward glances at K., and he was left alonein the falling snow. A fine setting for a fit of despair,"it occurred to him, " if I were only standing here byaccident instead of design."
Just then in the hut on his left hand a tiny windowwas opened, which had seemed quite blue when shut,perhaps ffoffn the reflection of the snow, and was sotiny that when opened it did not permit the whole faceof the person behind it to be seen, but only the eyes,old brown eyes. " There he is," K. heard a woman'strembling voice say. " It's the Land Surveyor,"ans^yered a man's voice. Then the man came to thewindow and asked, not unamiably, but still as if hewere anxious to have no complications in front of hishouse : " Are you waiting for somebody ? " " For a
sledge, to pick me up," said K. " No sledges will passhere," said the man, " there's no traffic here." " Butit's the road leading to the Castle," objected K. " Allthe same, all the same," said the man with a certainfinality, " there's no traffic here." Then they were bothsilent. But the man was obviously thinking of some-thing, for he kept the window open. " It's a bad road,"said K., to help him out. The only answer he got,however, was ; " Oh yes." But after a little the manvolunteered : "If you like, I'll take you in my sledge."" Please do," said K. delighted, " what is your charge ? "" Nothing," said the man. K. was very surprised. 
" Well, you're the Land Surveyor," explained the man," and you belong to the Castle. Where do you want tobe taken ? " "To the Castle," returned K. quickly. 

I won't take you there," said the man without hesita-tit)n. " But I belong to the Castle," said K., repeatingthe other's very words. " Maybe," said the man


THE CASTLE

28
shortly. Oh, well, take me to the inn," said K. Allright," said the man, '' I'll be out with the sledge ina moment." His whole behaviour had the appearanceof springing not from any special desire to be friendlybut rather from a kind of selfish, worried, andr almostpedantic insistence on shifting K. away from the frontof the house. 

The gate of the courtyard opened, and a small lightsledge, quite flat, without a seat of any kind, appeared,drawn by a feeble little horse, and behind it limped theman, a weakly stooped figure with a gaunt red snufflingface tliat looked peculiarly small beneath a tightlyswathed woollen scarf. He was obviously ailing, .andyet only to transport K. he had dragged himself out. 
K. ventured to mention it, but the man waved himaside. All that K. elicited was that he was a coachmancalled Gcrstacker, and that he had taken this uncom-fortable sledge because it was standing ready, and toget out one of the others would have wasted too muchlime. " Sit down," he said, pointing to the sledge," ril sit beside you,'’ said K. " Tm going to walk,"said Gcrstacker. " But why? " asked K. " I'm goingto walk," repeated Gerstacker, and was seized with alit of coughing which shook him so severely that hehad to brace his legs in the snow and hold on to the rimof the sledge. K. said no more, but sat down on thesledge, the man’s cough slowly abated, and they drove off. 

The Castle above them, which K. had hoped toreach that very day, was already beginning to growdark, and retreated again into the distance. But asil to give him a parting sign till their next encountera bell began to ring merrily up there, a bell which for'at least a second made his heart palpitate for its tonewas menacing, too, as if it threatened him with the


THE CASTLE

29
fulfilment of his vague desire. This great bell soondied away, however, and its place was taken by a feeblemonotonous little tinkle which might have come fromthe Castle, but might have been somewhere in the village. 
It certainly harmonised better with the slow-going journey,with the wretched-looking yet inexorable iiver. 

"I say,*' cried K. suddenly — they were already nearthe church, the inn was nc^t far off, and K. felt he couldrisk something — “ Tm surprised that you have thenerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ;are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid noattention, but went on walking quietly beside the littlehorse. ** Hi ! ** cried K., scraping some snow from thesledge and flinging a snowball which hit Gerstacker fullin the ear. That made him stop and turn round ; butwhen K. saw him at such close quarters — the sledge hadslid forward a little — this stooping and somehow ill-used figure with the thin red tired face and cheeks thatwere different — one being flat and the other fallen in —standing listening with his mouth open, displaying onlya few isolated teeth, he found that what he had justsaid out of malice had to be repeated out of pity, thatis, whether Gerstacker was likely to be penalised fordriving him about. What do you mean ? ” askedGerstacker incomprehendingly, but without waiting foran answer he spoke to the horse and they moved on again. 


n
W HEN by a turn in the road K. recognised that theywere near the inn, he was greatly surprised tosee that darkness had already set in. Had he been gone


THE CASTLE

30
for such a long time ? Surely not for more than an houror two, by his reckoning. And it had been morningwhen he left. And he had not felt any need of food. 
And just a short time ago it had been uniform daylight,and now the darkness of night was upon them. * ' Shortdays, short days/' be said to himself, slipped off thesledge, and went towards the inn. 

At the top of the little fligljt of steps leading into thehouse stood the landlord, a welcome figure, holding upa lighted lantern. Remembering his conductor for afleeting moment K. stood still, there was a cough in thedarkness behind him, that was he. Well, he would seehim again soon. Not until he was level with the land-lord, who greeted him humbly, did he notice two men,one on either side of the doorway. He took the lanternfrom his host’s hand and turned the light upon them ;it was tlic men he had already met, who were calledArthur and Jeremiah. They now saluted him. Thatreminded him of his soldiering days, happy days for him,and he laughed, Who are you ? ” he asked, lookingfrom one to the other, Your assistants,” they answered. 
” It's your assistants,” corroborated the landlord in a lowvoice. ” What ? ” said K., ” are you my old assistantswiiom I told to follow me and whom I am expecting ? ”rhey answered in the affirmative. ” That's good,”observed K. after a short pause. “ I'm glad you'vecome.” ” Well,” he said, after another pause, ” you'vecome very late, you’re very slack.” ” It was a long wayto come,” said one of them. ” A long way ? ” repeatedK., but I met you just now coming from the Castle.”” Yes,” said they without further explanation. ” Whereis the apparatus? ” asked K. “ We haven’t any,” saidthey. “ The apparatus I gave you? ” said K. ” Wehaven’t any,” they reiterated. Oh, you are fine


THE CASTLE

31
fellows ! said K., do you know anything about sur-veying ? ** No/' said they, But if you are my old
assistants you must know something about it/' said K. 
They made no reply. “ Well, come in," said K., pushingthem before him into the house. 

They sat down then all three together over their beerat a small table, saying little, K. in the middle with anassistant on^ach side. As on the other evening, therewas only one other table occupied by a few peasants. 
" You're a difficult problem," said K., comparing them,as he had already done several times. "How am I toknow one of you from the other ? The only differencebetween you is your names, otherwise you're as likeas . ! He stopped, and then went on involuntarily,' You're as like as two snakes." They smiled. " Peopleusually manage to distinguish us quite well," they saidin self-justification. " I am sure they do,*' said K., " Iwas a witness of that myself, but I can only see with myown eyes, and with them I can't distinguish you. SoI shall treat you as if you were one man and call youboth Arthur, that's one of your names, yours, isn't it ? "he asked one of them. " No," said the man, " I'mJeremiah." " It doesn't matter," said K. " I'll call youboth Arthu If I tell Arthur to go anywhere you mustboth go. If I give Arthur something to do you must bothdo it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent-ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but theadvantage that you will both be equally responsible foranything I tell you to do. How you divide the workbetween you doesn't matter to me, only you're not toexcuse yourselves by blaming each other, for me you’regnly one man." They considered this, and said : " Weshouldn't like that at all." " I don't suppose so," saidK. ; ‘‘ of course you won't like it, but that's how it has


THE CASTLE

to be/" For some little time one of the peasants had beensneaking round the table and K. had noticed him ; nowthe fellow took courage and went up to one of the assist-ants to whisper something. " Excuse me/' said K.,bringing his hand down on the table and rising^'to hisfeet, “ these are my assistants and we're discussing privatebusiness. Nobody is entitled to disturb us." " Sorry,sir, sorry," muttered the peasant anxiouslj^ retreatingbackwards towards his friends. " And this is my mostimportant charge to you," said K., sitting down again. 

You're not to speak to anyone without my permission. 
I am a stranger here, and if you are my old assistantsyou are strangers too. We three strangers must standby each other therefore, give me your hands on that."All too eagerly they stretched out their hands to K. 
" Never mind the trimming," said he, " but rememberthat my command holds good. I shall go to bed now,and I recommend you to do the same. To-day we havemissed a day's work, and to-morrow we must begin veryearly. You must get hold of a sleigh for taking me to theCastle and have it ready outside the house at six o'clock."" Veiy well," said one. But the other interrupted him. 
" You say ‘ very well and yet you know it can't bedone." " Silence," said K. " You're trying alreadyto dissociate yourselves from each other." But then thefirst man broke in : " He's right, it can't be done, nostranger can get into the Castle without a permit.""Where does one apply for a permit?" "I don'tknow, pcrliaps to the Castellan." " Then we'll applyby telephone, go and telephone to the Castellan atonce, both of you." They rushed to the instrument,asked for the connection — how eager they were about it !,in externals they were absurdly docile — and enquiredif K. could come with them nert morning into the


THE CASTLE

33
Castle. The No ** of the answer was audible even toK. at his table. But the answer went on and was stillmore explicit, it ran as follows : Neither to-morrow
nor •at any other time.** ** I shall telephone myself,**said K., and got up. While K. and his assistantshitherto had passed nearly imremarked except for theincident with the one peasant, his last statementaroused geij/eral attention. They all got up when K. 
did, and although the ^landlord tried to drive themaway, crowded round him in a close semicircle at thetelephone. The general opinion among them was thatK. would get no answer at all. K. had to beg them to bequiet, saying he did not want to hear their opinion. 

The receiver gave out a buzz of a kind that K. hadnever before heard on a telephone. It was like thehum of countless children*s voices — but yet not a hum,the echo rather of voices singing at an infinite distance—blended by sheer impossibility into one high butresonant sound which vibrated on the ear as if it weretrying to penetrate beyond mere hearing. K. listenedwithout attempting to telephone, leaning his left armon the telephone shelf. 

He did not know how long he had stood there, buthe stood until the landlord pulled at his coat sayingthat a messenger had come to speak with him. Goaway ! ** yelled K. in an access of rage, perhaps into themouthpiece, for someone immediately answered fromthe other end. The following conversation ensued ;“ Oswald speaking, who*s there ? ** cried a severearrogant voice with a small defect in its speech, asseemed to K., which its owner tried to cover by anexaggerated severity. K. hesitated to announce him-self, for he was at the mercy of the telephone, the othercould shout him down or hang up the receiver, and that2


THE CASTLE

34
might mean the blocking of a not unimportant wayof access. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient,** Who's there 5 he repeated, adding, '' I should beobliged if there was less telephoning from down there,only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. ignoredthis remark, and announced with sudden decision :“ The Land Surveyor's assistant speaking." " WhatLand Surveyor ? What assistant ? " K., recollected
yesterday’s telephone conversation, and said briefly," Ask Fritz." This succeeded, to his own astonishment. 
»But even more than at his success he was astonished atthe organisation of the Castle service. The answer came :" Oh, yes. That everlasting Land Surveyor. Quite so. 
What about it ? What assistant ? " " Joseph," said K. 
He was a little put out by the murmuring of the peasantsbehind his back, obviously they disapproved of his ruse. 
Jlc liad no time to bother about them, however, forthe conversation absorbed all his attention. " Joseph J "came the question. " But the assistants are called . . ."there was a short pause, evidently to enquire the namesfrom somebody else, " Arthur and Jeremiah." " Thesearc the new assistants," said K. " No, they are the oldones." " They arc the new ones, I am the old assistant ;1 came to-day after the Land Surveyor." " No," wasshouted back. " Then who am I ? " asked K. asblandly as before. ^
And after a pause the same voice with the same defectanswered him, yet with a deeper and more authoritativitone : " You arc the old assistant."
K. was listening to the new note, and almost missecthe question : " What is it you want ? " He felt lik<laying dow'n the receiver. He had ceased to expectanything from this conversation. But being pressed,he replied quick!)' : " When can my master come to


THE CASTLE 35
the Castle ? " Never/' was the answer. " Very well/'
said K., and hung the receiver up. 

Behind him die peasants had crowded quite close. 
Hi5 assistants, with many side glances in his direction,were 'trying to keep them back. But they seemed notto take the matter very seriously, and in any case thepeasants, satisfied with the result of the conversation,were beginning to give ^ound. A man came cleavinghis way with rapid steps through the group, bowedbefore K. and handed him a letter. K. took it, butlooked at the man, who for the moment seemed to himthe more important. There was a great resemblancebetween this new-comer and the assistants, he was slimlike them and clad in the same tight-fitting garments,had the same suppleness and agility, and yet he wasquite different. How much K.. would have preferredhim ^ an assistant ! He reminded K. a little of thegirl with the infant whom he had seen at the tanner's. 
He was clothed nearly all in white, not in silk, of course ;he was in winter clothes like all the others, but thematerial he was wearing had the softness and dignityof silk. His face was clear and frank, his eyes largerthan ordinary. His smile was unusually jpyous ; hedrew his hand over his face as if to conce^ the smile,but in vain. '' Who are you ? " asked K. "My nameis Barnabas," said he, "I am a messenger." His lipswere strong and yet gentle as he spoke. " Do youapprove of this kind of thing? " asked K., pointing tothe peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity,and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths,coarse lips, and literally tortured faces — their heads* looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and therefeatures as if the pain of the beating had twisted themto the present shape — and yet they ^were not exactly


THE CASTLE

36
gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away andstudied some indifferent object in the room beforefixing on him again, and then K. pointed also to hisassistants who stood linked together, cheek againstcheek, and smiling, but whether submissively or ifiock-ingly could not be determined. All these he pointedout as if presenting a train of followers forced upon himby circumstances, and as if he ^expected Barnabas — thatindicated intimacy, it occurred to K. — always to dis-criminate between him and them. But Barnabas —quite innocently, it was clear — ignored the question,letting it pass as a well-bred servant ignores some remarkof lus master only apparently addressed to him, andmerely surveyed the room in obedience to the question,greeting by a {pressure of the hand various acquaintancesamong the peasants and exchanging a few words withthe assistants, all with a free independence which sethim apart from the others. Rebuffed but not mortified,K. returned to the letter in his hand and opened it. 
Its contents were as follows : ** My dear Sir, As youknow, you have been engaged for the Count's service. 
Your immediate superior is the Superintendent of thevillage, who will give you all particulars about yourwork and the terms of your employment, and to whomyou are responsible. I myself, however, will try not tolose sight of you. Barnabas, the bearer of this letter*will report himself to you from time to time to learnyour wishes and communicate them to me. You willfind me always ready to oblige you, in so far as that ispossible. I desire my workers to be contented.” Thesignature was illegible, but stamped beside it was” Chief of Department X.” ” Wait a little I ” said K. 
to Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com-manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he


THE CASTLE

37
wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. At thesame time he reflected that Barnabas, although soattractive, was still only a messenger, and ordered amug of beer for him. He looked to see how BarnabaswouM take it, but Barnabas was obviously quite pleasedand began to drink the beer at once. Then K. wentoff with the landlord. The house was so small thatnothing w^ available for K. but a little attic room, andeven that had caused some difficulty, for two maidswho had hitherto slept in it had had to be quarteredelsewhere. Nothing indeed had been done but to clearthe maids out, the room was otherwise quite unprepared,no sheets on the single bed, only some pillows and ahorse-blanket still in the same rumpled state as in themorning. A few sacred pictures and photographs ofsoldiers were on the walls, the room had not even beenaired ,* obviously they hoped that the new guest wouldnot stay long, and were doing nothing to encouragehim. K. felt no resentment, however, wrapped himselfin the blanket, sat down at the table, and began toread the letter again by the light of a candle. 

It was not a consistent letter ; in part it dealt withhim as with a free man whose independence was recog-nised, the mode of address for example, and the referenceto his wishes. But there were other places in which hewas directly or indirectly treated as a minor employee,hardly visible to the Heads of Departments ; the writerwould try to make an effort “ not to lose sight " of him,his superior was only the village Superintendent towhom he was actually responsible, probably his solecolleague would be the village policeman. These wereinconsistencies, no doubt about it. They were so obviousthat they had to be faced. It hardly occurred to K. 
that they might be due to indecision ; that seemed a


THE CASTLE

38
mad idea in connection with such an organisation* Hewas much more inclined to read into them a franklyoffered choice, which left it to him to make what heliked out of the letter, whether he preferred to become avillage worker with a distinctive but merely apparentconnection with the Castle, or an ostensible villageworker whose real occupation was determined throughthe medium of Barnabas. K. did not hesitate in hischoice, and would not have hesitated even had he lackedthe experience which had befallen him since his arrival. 
Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possiblefrom the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieveanything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weienow so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to himonce he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly theirfriend ; and if he were to become indistinguishablefrom Gerstacker or Lasemann — and that must happenas soon as possible, everything depended on that—thenall kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, whichwould remain not only for ever closed to him but quiteinvisible were he to depend merely on the favour of thegentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger,and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, evenelaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un-avoidable. That w'as sinking to the workman's level —service, superior work, terms of employment, responsibleworkers the letter fairly reeked of it, and even thoughmore personal messages were included they were writtenfrom the standpoint of an employer. If K. were willingto become a workman he could do so, but he wouldlave to do it in grim earnest, without any other prospect. 

new that he had no real compulsory discipline tolear, he was not afraid of that, an 1 in this case least of® » ut 1 1 C pressure of a discouraging environment, of


THE CASTLE

39
a growing resignation to disappointment, the pressureof the imperceptible influences of every moment, thesethings he did fear, but tliat was a danger he wouldhave to guard against. Nor did the letter pass overthe feet that if it should come to a struggle K. had hadthe hardihood to make the first advances ; it was verysubtly indicated and only to be sensed by an uneasyconscience— an uneasy conscience, not a bad one — itlay in the three words as you know,*' referring to hisengagement in the Count's service. K. had reportedhis arrival, and only after that, as the letter pointed out,had he known that he was engaged. 

K. took down a picture from the wall and stuck theletter on the nail, this was the room he was to live inand the letter should hang there. 

Then he went down to the inn parlour. Barnabaswas sitting at a table with the assistants. " Oh, thereyou are," said K, without any reason, only because hewas glad to see Barnabas, who jumped to his feet atonce. Hardly had K. shown his face when the peasantsgot up and gathered round him — it had become a habitof theirs to follow him around. " What are you alwaysfollowing me about for ? " cried K. They were notoffended, and slowly drifted back to their seats again. 
One of them in passing said casually in apology, withan enigmatic smile which was reflected on several ofthe others' faces : " There's always something new tolisten to," and he licked his lips as if news were meatand drink to him. K, said nothing conciliatory, it wasgood for them to have a little respect for him, but hardlyhad he reached Barnabas when he felt a peasant. breathing down the back of his neck. He had onlycome, he said, for the salt-cellar, but K. stamped hisfoot with rage and the peasant scuttled away without


THE CASTLE

40
the salt-cellar. It was really easy to get at K., all onehad to do was to egg on the peasants against him, theirpersistent interference seemed much more objectionableto him than the reserve of the others, nor were they freefrom reserve either, for if he had sat down at their' tablethey would not have stayed. Only the presence ofBarnabas restrained him from making a scene. But heturned round to scowl at them, and found that they,too, were all looking at him. When he saw them sittinglike that, however, each man in his own place, notspeaking to one another and without any apparentmutual understanding, united only by the fact that theywere all gazing at him, he concluded that it was notout of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they reallywanted something from him and were only incapableof expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness,which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not thelandlord himself childish, standing there stock-stillgazing at K. with a glass of beer in his hand which heshould have been carrying to a customer, and obliviousof his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatchcalling to him ?
With a quieter mind K. turned to Barnabas ; hewould have liked to dismiss his assistants, but couldnot think of an excuse. Besides, they were broodingpeacefully over their beer. The letter,'' began K.,
“ I have read it. Do you know the contents ? " No,"said Barnabas, whose look seemed to imply more thanhis words. Perhaps K, was as mistaken in Barnabas'sgoodness as in the malice of the peasants, but his presenceremained a comfort. " You are mentioned in the letter,too, you are supposed to carry messages now and then*from me to the Chief, that's why I thought you mightknow the contents." " I was only told," said Barnabas,


THE CASTLE

41
to give you the letter, to wait until you had read it,and then to bring back a verbal or written answer ifyou thought it needful/' ** Very well," said K.," there's no need to write anything ; convey to theChief — by the way, what's his name ? I couldn't readhis signature." " Klamm," said Barnabas. " Well,convey to Herr Klamm my thanks for his recognitionand for hi» great kindrjess, which I appreciate, beingas I am one who has not yet proved his worth here. 
I shall follow his instructions faithfully. I have noparticular requests to make for to-day." Barnabas,who had listened with close attention, asked to beallowed to recapitulate the message. K. assented,Barnabas repeated it word for word. Then he rose totake his leave. 

K. had been studying his face the whole time, andnow he gave it a last survey. Barnabas was about thesame height as K., but his eyes seemed to look downon K., yet that was almost in a kind of humility, it wasimpossible to think that this man could put anyone toshame. Of course he was only a messenger, and didnot know the contents of the letters he carried, but theexpression in his eyes, his smile, his bearing, seemedalso to convey a message, however little he might knowabout it. And K. shook him by the hand, which seemedobviously to surprise him, for he had been going tocontent himself with a bow. 

As soon as he had gone — before opening the doorhe had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment andembraced the room generally in a final glance — K. saidto the assistants : " I'll bring down the plans from myroom, and then we'll discuss what work is to be donefirst." They wanted to accompany him. " Stay here,"said K. Still they tried to accompany him. K. had to


THE CASTLE

42
repeat his command more authoritatively. Barnabaswas no longer in the hall. But he had only just goneout. Yet in front of the house — fresh snow was falling —K. could not sec him either. He called out : Barnabas ! "No answer. Could he still be in the house ? Nothingelse seemed possible. None the less K. yelled the namewith the full force of his lungs. It thundered throughthe night. And from the distance came a fakit response,so far away was Barnabas already. K. called him back,and at the same time went to meet him ; the spotwhere they encountered each other was no longer visiblefrom the inn. 

“ Barnabas,*’ said K., and could not keep his voicefrom trembling, ” I have something else to say to you. 
And that reminds me that it’s a bad arrangement toleave me dependent on your chance comings for sendinga message to the Castle. If I hadn’t happened to catchyou just now — how you fly along, I thought you werestill in the house — who knows how long I might havehad to wait for your next appearance.” “You canask the Chief,” said Barnabas, “ to send me at definitetimes appointed by yourself.” “ Even that would notsuflicc,” said K., “ I might have nothing to say for ayear at a time, but something of urgent importance mightoccur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,”
“ Well,” said Barnabas, “ shall I report to the Chiefthat between him and you some other means of com-munication should be established instead of me ? ”
“ No, no,” sSaid K., “ not at all, I only mention thematter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enoughto catch you.” “ Shall we go back to the inn,” saidBarnabas, “ so that you can give me the new message*there? ” He had already taken a step in the directionof the inn. Barnabas,” said K., “ it isn’t necessary,


THE CASTLE

43
ril go a part of the way with you/' " Why don't youwant to go to the inn ? " asked Barnabas. ‘‘ Thepeople there annoy me/* said K. ; you saw for yourselfhow persistent the peasants are/* We could go intoyour Yoom/* said Barnabas. It*s the maids* room,"said K., " dirty and stuffy — it*s to avoid staying therethat I want to accompany you for a little, only,** headded, in oij^ler finally to overcome Barnabas*s reluctance," you must let me take your arm, for you are surer offoot than I am.** And K. took his arm. It was quitedark, K. could not see Barnabas's face, his figure wasonly vaguely discernible, he had had to grope for hisarm a minute or two. 

Bafnabas yielded and they moved away from the inn. 
K. realised, indeed, that his utmost efforts could notenable him to keep pace with Barnabas, that he was adrag on him, and that even in ordinary circumstancesthis trivial accident might be enough to ruin everything,not to speak of side-streets like the one in which he had gotstuck that morning, out of which he could never struggleunless Barnabas were to carry him. But he banishedall such anxieties, and was comforted by Barnabas'ssilence ,* for if they went on in silence then Barnabas,too, must feel that their excursion together was the solereason for their association. 

They went on, but K. did not know whither, he coulddiscern nothing, not even whether they had alreadypassed the church or not. The effort which it cost himmerely to keep going made him lose control of histhoughts. Instead of remaining fixed on their goalthey strayed. Memories of his home kept recurring•and filled his mind. There, too, a church stood in themarket-place, partly surrounded by an old graveyardwhich was again surrounded by a high wall. Very few


the castle

44
boys had managed to climb that wall, and for some timeK., too, had failed. It was not curiosity which hadurged them on. The graveyard had been no mysteryto them. They had often entered it through a smallwicket-gate, it was only the smooth high wall that theyhad wanted to conquer. But one morning — the empty,quiet market-place had been flooded with sunshine,when had K. ever seen it lijce that either before oisince ? — he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishingease ; at a place where he had already slipped downmany a time he had clambered with a small flag betweenhis teeth right to the top at the first attempt. Stoneswere still rattling down under his feet, but he was atthe top. He stuck the flag in, it flew in the wind, helooked down and round about him, over his shoulder,too, at the crosses mouldering in the ground, nobodywas greater than he at that place and that moment. 
By chance the teacher had come past and with a sternface had made K, descend. In jumping down he hadhurt his knee and had found some difficulty in gettinghome, but still he had been on the top of the wall. 
The sense of that triumph had seemed to him then avictory for life, whicli was not altogether foolish, foinow so many years later on the arm of Barnabas in thesnowy night the memory of it came to succour him. 

He took a finner hold, Barnabas was almost dragginghim along, the silence was unbroken. Of the road theyw'ere following all that K. knew was that to judge fromits surface they liad not yet turned aside into a by-street. 
He vowed to liimself that, however difficult the way andhowever doubtful even the prospect of his being ableto get back, he would not cease from going on. He\^'ould surely have strength enough to let himself be
must come to an end some


THE CASTLE

45
time. By day the Castle had looked within easy reach,and, of course, the messenger would take the shortest cut. 

At that moment Barnabas stopped. Where werethey ? Was this the end ? Would Barnabas try toleave him ? He wouldn't succeed. K. clutched hisarm so firmly that it almost made his hand ache. Orhad the incredible happened, and were they alreadyin the Castie or at its gates ? But they had not doneany climbing so far as K. could tell. Or had Barnabastaken him up by an imperceptibly mounting road ?** Where are we ? " said K. in a low voice, more tohimself than to Barnabas. ‘‘ At home," said Barnabasin tjie same tone. " At home? " "Be careful now,sir, or you'll slip. We go down here." " Down ? "" Only a step or two," added Barnabas, and wasalready knocking at a door. 

A girl opened it, and they were on the threshold of alarge room almost in darkness, for there was no lightsave for a tiny oil lamp hanging over a table in thebackground. " Who is with you, Barnabas ? " askedthe girl. " The Land Surveyor," said he. " TheLand Surveyor," repeated the girl in a louder voice,turning towards the table. Two old people there roseto their feet, a man and a woman, as well as anothergirl. They greeted K. Barnabas introduced the wholefamily, his parents and his sisters Olga and Amalia. 
K. scarcely glanced at them and let them take his wetcoat off to dry at the stove. 

So it was only Barnabas who was at home, not hehimself. But why had they come here ? K. drewBarnabas aside and asked : " Why have you come here ?Or do you live in the Castle precincts ? " " The Castleprecincts ? " repeated Barnabas, as if he did not under-stand. " Barnabas," said K., " you left the inn to go


THE CASTLE

46
to the Castle." " No," said Barnabas, " I left it tocome home, I don’t go to the Castle till the earlymorning, I never sleep there." Oh, said K., soyou weren’t going to the Castle, but only here "--theman’s smile seemed less brilliant, and his person moreinsignificant—" Why didn’t you say so ? " " You
didn’t ask me, sir," said Barnabas, " you only said youhad a message to give me, but, you wouldn’t give it inthe inn parlour, or in your room, so I thought youcould speak to me quietly here in my parents’ house. 
The others will all leave us if you wish — and, if youprefer, you could spend the night here. Haven’t I donethe right thing?" K. could not reply. It had beensimply a misunderstanding, a common, vulgar mis-understanding, and K. had been completely taken inby it. He had been bewitched by Barnabas’s close-fitting, silken-gleaming jacket, which, now that it wasunbuttoned, displayed a coarse, dirty grey shirt patchedall over, and beneath that the huge muscular chest of alabourer. His surroundings not only corroborated allthis but even emphasised it, the old gouty father whoprogressed more by the help of his groping hands thanby the slow movements of his stiff legs, and the motherwith her hands folded on her bosom, who was equallyincapable of any but the smallest steps by reason of herstoutness. Both of them, father and mother, had beenadvancing from their corner towards K. ever since hehad come in, and were still a long way off. The yellow-haired sisters, very like each other and very like Barnabas,but with harder features than their brother, greatstrapping wenches, hovered round their parents andwaited for some word of greeting from K. But he couldnot utter it. He had been persuaded that in this villageeverybody meant something to him, and indeed he was


THE CASTLE

47
not mistaken, it was only for these people here that hecould feel not the slightest interest. If he had been fitto struggle back to the inn alone he would have left atonce. The possibility of accompanying Barnabas totheYiastle early in the morning did not attract him. 
He had hoped to penetrate into the Castle unremarkedin the night on the arm of Barnabas, but on the arm ofthe Barnabjs he had imagined, a man who was moreto him than anyone else,* the Barnabas he had conceivedto be far above his apparent rank and in the intimateconfidence of the Castle. With the son of such a family,however, a son who integrally belonged to it, and whowas already sitting at table with the others, a man whowas* not even allowed to sleep in the Castle, he couldnot possibly go to the Castle in the broad light of day,it would be a ridiculous and hopeless undertaking. 

K. sat down on a window-seat where he determinedto pass the night without accepting any other favour. 
The other people in the village, who turned him awayor were afraid of him, seemed much less dangerous, forall that they did was to throw him back on his ownresources, helping him to concentrate his powers, butsuch ostensible helpers as these who on the strength ofa petty masquerade brought him into their homesinstead of into the Castle, deflected him, whetherintentionally or not, from his goal and only helped todestroy him. An invitation to join the family at tablehe ignored completely, stubbornly sitting with benthead on his bench. 

Then Olga, the gentler of the sisters, got up, notwithout a trace of maidenly embarrassment, came overto K. and asked him to join the family meal of breadand bacon, saying that she was going to fetch somebeer. Where from ? ” asked K. ** From the inn,*'


THE CASTLE

she said. That was welcome news to K. He beggedher instead of fetching beer to accompany him ba<^ tothe inn, where he had important work waiting to bedone. But the fact now emerged that she was not gj^ingso far as his inn, she was going to one much nearer,called the Herrenhof. None the less K. begged to beallowed to accompany her, thinking that there perhapshe might find a lodging for the night ; however wretchedit might be he would prefer It to the best bed thesepeople could offer him. Olga did not reply at once,but glanced towards the table. Her brother stood up,nodded obligingly, and said : ** If the gentleman
wishes.'* This assent was almost enough to make K. 
withdraw his request, nothing could be of much v^alueif Barnabas assented to it. But since they were alreadywondering whether K. would be admitted into thatinn and doubting its possibility, he insisted emphaticallyupon going, without taking the trouble to give a colour-able excuse for his eagerness ; this family would haveto accept him as he was, he had no feeling of shamewhere they were concerned. Yet he was somewhatdisturbed by Amalia’s direct and serious gaze, whichwas unflinching and perhaps a little stupid. 

On their short walk to the inn — K. had taken Olga’sarm and was leaning his whole weight on her as earlieron Barnabas, he could not get along otherwise — helearned that it was an inn exclusively reserved forgentlemen from the Castle, who took their meals thereand sometimes slept there whenever they had businessin the village. Olga spoke to K. in a low and con-fidential tone ; to walk with her was pleasant, almost aspleasant as walking with her brother. K. struggled againsttlie feeling of comfort she gave him, but it persisted. 

From outside the new inn looked very like the inn


THE CASTLE

49
where K. was staying. All the houses in the villageresembled one another more or less, but still a few smalldifferences were immediately apparent here ; theffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern wasfixed over the doorway. Something fluttered overtheir heads as they entered, it was a flag with theCount's colours. In the hall they were at once met bythe landlord}, who was obviously on a tour of inspection ;he glanced at K. in passing with small eyes that wereeither screwed up critically, or half-asleep, and said :
The Land Surveyor mustn't go anywhere but intothe bar." " Certainly," said Olga, who took K.'s partat once, " he's only escorting me." But K. ungratefullylet*go her arm and drew the landlord aside. Olgameanwhile waited patiently at the end of the hall. 
" I should like to spend the night here," said K. " I'mafraid that's impossible," said the landlord. "Youdon't seem to be aware that this house is reservedexclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well,that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possibleto let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should beonly too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " butbesides the strictness with which the rule is enforced —and you speak about it as only a stranger could — it'squite out of the question for another reason ; the Castlegentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced theycouldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless theywere prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleephere, and by some chance or other — and chances arealways on the side of the gentlemen — ^you were dis-covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. 
That sounds ridiculous, but it's true." This tall andclosely-buttoned man who stood with his legs crossed,one hand braced against the wall and the other on his


THE CASTLE

50
hip, bending down a little towards K. and speakingconfidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anythingin common with the village, even although his darkclothes looked like a peasant's finery. “ I believe ;rouabsolutely,'" said K., and I didn't mean to belittlethe rule, although I expressed myself badly. Onlythere's something I'd like to point out, I have someinfluence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, andthat secures you against any danger arising out of mystay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am ablefully to recompense any small favour you may do me."" Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again," I know all that." Now was the time for K. to statehis wishes more clearly, but this reply of the landlord'sdisconcerted him, and so he merely asked, " Are theremany of the Castle gentlemen staying in the house to-night ? " " As far as that goes, to-night is favourable,"returned the landlord, as if in encouragement, " there'sonly one gentleman." Still K. felt incapable of urgingthe matter, but being in hopes that he was as good asaccepted, he contented himself by asking the name ofthe gentleman. " Klamm," said the landlord casually,turning meanwhile to his wife who came rustlingtowards them in a remarkably shabby, old-fashionedgown overloaded with pleats and frills, but of a finecity cut. She came to summon the landlord, for theChief wanted something or other. Before the landlordcomplied, however, he turned once more to K., as if itlay with K. to make the decision about staying all night. 
But K. could not utter a word, overwhelmed as he wasby the discovery that it was his patron who was in thehouse. Without being able to explain it completely tohimself he did not feel the same freedom of action inrelation to Klamm as he did to the rest of the Castle,


THE CASTLE

51
and the idea of being caught in the inn by Klamm,although it did not terrify him as it did the landlord,gave him a twinge of uneasiness, much as if he werethoughtlessly to hurt the feelings of someone to whomhe was bound b)' gratitude ,* at the same time, however,it vexed him to recognise already in these qualms theobvious effects of that degradation to an inferior statuswhich he had feared, and to realise that although theywere so obvious he was not even in a position to counter-act them. So he stood there biting his lips and saidnothing. Once more the landlord looked back at himbefore disappearing through a doorway, and K. re-turned the look without moving from the spot, untilOlga came up and drew him away. ** What did youwant with the landlord ? she asked. ** I wanted abed for the night,*’ said K. “ But you’re staying withus ! ” said Olga in surprise. Of course,” said K.,leaving her to make what she liked of it. 


m
I N the bar, which was a large room with a vacantspace in the middle, there were several peasantssitting by the wall on the tops of some casks, but theylooked different from those in K.’s inn. They weremore neatly and uniformly dressed in coarse yellowish-grey cloth, with loose jackets and tightly-fitting trousers. 
They were smallish men with at first sight a strongmutual resemblance, having flat bony faces, but roundedcheeks. They were all quiet, and sat with hardly amovement, except that they followed the newcomerswith their eyes, but they did even that slowly and


THE CASTLE

52
indifferently. Yet because of their numbers and theirquietness they had a certain effect on K. He tookOlga's arm again as if to explain his presence there. Aman rose up from one corner, an acquaintance/'ofOlga’s, and made towards her, but K. wheeled herround by the arm in another direction. His action wasperceptible to nobody but Olga, and she tolerated itwith a smiling side-glance. ^ '
The beer was drawn off by a young girl calledFrieda. An unobtrusive little girl with fair hair, sadeyes, and hollow cheeks, with a striking look of conscioussuperiority. As soon as her eye met K.’s it seemed tohim that her look decided something concerning hjm-self, something which he had not known to exist, butwhich her look assured him did exist. He kept on study-ing her from the side, even while she was speaking toOlga. Olga and Frieda were apparently not intimate,they exchanged only a few cold words. K. wanted tohear more, and so interposed with a question on hisown account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm ? ” Olgalaughed out loud. What are you laughing at ? *' askedK. irritably. I’m not laughing,” she protested, butwent on laughing. ” Olga is a childish creature,” saidK. bending far over the counter in order to attractFrieda’s gaze again. But she kept her eyes loweredand laughed shyly. ” Would you like to see HerrKlamm ? ” K. begged for a sight of him. She pointedto a door just on her left. ” There’s a little peepholethere, you can look through.” ” What about theothers ? ” asked K. She curled her underlip and pulledK. to tlie door witli a hand that was unusually soft. 
The little hole had obviously been bored for spyingthrough, and commanded almost the whole of the neigh-bouring room. At a desk in the middle of the room


THE CASTLE

5 ?
in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his facebrilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hunglow before him. A middle-sized, plump, and ponderousmain. His face was still smooth, but his cheeks werealrwdy somewhat flabby with age. His black mous-tache had long points, his eyes were hidden behindglittering pince-nez that sat awry. If he had beenplanted sqjiarely before his desk K. would only haveseen his profile, but since he was turned directly towardsK. his whole face was visible. His left elbow lay on thedesk, his right hand, in which was a Virginia cigar,rested on his knee. A beer-glass was standing on thedesk, but there was a rim round the desk which preventedK. “from seeing whether any papers were lying on it,he had the idea, however, that there were none. Tomake it certain he asked Frieda to look through thehole and tell him if there were any. But since she hadbeen in that room a short time ago, she was able toinform him without further ado that the desk was empty. 
K. asked Frieda if his time was up, but she told him togo on looking as long as he liked. K. was now alonewith Frieda. Olga, as a hasty glance assured him, hadfound her way to her acquaintance, and was sitting highon a cask swinging her legs. Frieda," said K. in awhisper, " do you know Herr Klamm well ? " " Oh,
yes," she said, " very well." She leaned over to K. andhe became aware that she was coquettishly fingering thelow-cut cream-coloured blouse which sat oddly on herpoor thin body. Then she said : " Didn't you noticehow Olga laughed ? " " Yes, the rude creature," said
K. " Well," she said cxtenuatingly, " there was areason for laughing. You asked if I knew Klamm, andyou see I " — here she involuntarily lifted her chin alittle, and again her triumphant glance, which had no


THE CASTLE

54
connection whatever with what she was saying, sweptover K.— I am his mistress/' “ Klamm's mistress,"said K. She nodded. " Then," said K. smiling, toprevent the atmosphere from being too charged withseriousness, " you are for me a highly respectableperson." " Not only for you," said Frieda amiably, butwithout returning his smile. K. had a weapon forbringing down her pride, and he tried it : " Have youever been in the Castle ? " But it missed the mark, forshe answered : " No, but isn't it enough for me to behere in the bar ? " Her vanity was obviously boundless,and she was trying, it seemed, to get K. in particular tominister to it. " Of course," said K., " here in the baryou're taking the landlord's place." " That's so," sheassented, " and I began as a byre-maid at the inn bythe bridge." " With those delicate hands," said K. half-qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether hewas only flattering her or was compelled by somethingin her. Her hands were certainly small and delicate,but they could quite as well have been called weak andcharacterless. " Nobody bothered about them then,"she said, " and even now ..." K. looked at herenquiringly. She shook her head and would say nomore. "You have your secrets, naturally," said K.," and you’re not likely to give them away to somebodyyou've known for only half an hour, and who hasn'thad the chance yet to tell you anything about himself."This remark proved to be ill-chosen, for it seemed toarouse Frieda as from a trance that was favourable tohim. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdleshe took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep-hole with it, and said to K. wTth an obvious attempt toconceal the cliangc in her attitude ; " Oh, I know allabout you, you're the Land Surveyor," and then adding :


THE CASTLE

55
but now I must go back to my work/' she returned toher place behind the bar counter, while a man hereand there came up to get his empty glass refilled. K. 
waA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glassfrom a stand and went up to her, saying : “ One thingmore, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat anda sign of great strength of mind to have worked yourway up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, butcan it be the end of all ambition for a person like you ?An absurd idea. Your eyes — don't laugh at me, FrauleinFrieda — speak to me far more of conquests still to comethan of conquests past. But the opposition one meets inthe, world is great, and becomes greater the higher oneaims, and it's no disgrace to accept the help of a manwho’s fighting his way up too, even though he's a smalland uninfluential man. Perhaps we could have a quiettalk together sometime, without so many onlookers ? "
I don't know what you're after," she said, and in hertone this time there seemed to be, against her will, anecho rather of countless disappointments than of pasttriumphs. " Do you want to take me away fromKlamm perhaps? O heavens I " and she clapped herhands. " You've seen through me," said K., as ifwearied by so much mistrust, " that's exactly my realsecret intention. You ought to leave Klamm andbecome my sweetheart. And now I can go. Olga ! "he cried, " we're going home." Obediently Olga sliddown from her cask but did not succeed immediatelyin breaking through her ring of friends. Then Friedasaid in a low voice with a hectoring look at K. ; " Whencan I talk to you ? " " Can I spend the night here ? "asked K. "Yes," said Frieda. " Can I stay now ? "“ Go out first with Olga, so that I can clear out all theothers. Then you can come back in a little." " Right,"


THE CASTLE

56
said K., and he waited impatiently for Olga. But thepeasants would not let her go ; they had made up adance in which she was the central ngure, they circledround her yelling all together and every now and ^enone of them left the ring, seized Olga firmly round thewaist and whirled her round and round ; the pacegrew faster and faster, the yells more hungry, moreraucous, until they were insensibly blended into onecontinuous howl. Olga, who had begun laughingly bytrying to break out of the ring, was now merely reelingwith flying hair from one man to the other. That'sthe kind of people Tm saddled with," said Frieda, bitingher thin lips in scorn. " Who are they ? " asked K. 

" Klamm's servants," said Frieda, " he keeps on bring-ing those people with him, and they upset me. I canhardly tell what I've been saying to you, but please for-give me if I've offended you, it's these people who areto blame, they're the most contemptible and objection-able creatures I know, and I have to fill their glassesup with beer for them. How often I've implored Klammto leave them behind him, for though I have to put upwith the other gentlemen’s servants, he could surelyhave some consideration for me ; but it's all no use,an hour before his arrival they always come burstingin like cattle into their stalls. But now they've reallygot to get into the stalls, where they belong. If youweren't here I’d fling open this door and Klammwould be forced to drive them out himself." " Can'the hear them, then ? " asked K. " No," said Frieda,"he’s asleep." "Asleep?" cried K. "But when Ipeeped in he was awake and sitting at the desk." " Healways sits like that," said Frieda, " he was sleeping 'when you saw him. Would I have let you look in ifhe hadn't been asleep ? That's how he sleeps, the


THE CASTLE

57
gentlemen do sleep a great deal, it^s hard to under-stand, Anyhow, if he didn't sleep so much, he wouldn'tbe able to put up with his servants. But now Til haveto tlirn them out myself." She took a whip from a cornerand sprang among the dancers with a single bound, alittle uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. Atfirst tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner,and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined tolet the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying :
In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, intothe stall, all of you ! " When they saw that she was inearnest they began to press towards the back wall in akind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under theimpact of the first few a door shot open, letting in acurrent of night air through which they all vanishedwith Frieda behind them openly driving them acrossthe courtyard into the stalls. 

In the sudden silence which ensued K. heard stepsin the vestibule. With some idea of securing his posi-tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which affordedthe only possible cover in the room. He had anadmitted right to be in the bar, but since he meant tospend the night there he had to avoid being seen. Sowhen the door was actually opened he slid under thecounter. To be discovered there of course would haveits dangers too, yet he could explain plausibly enoughthat he had only taken refuge from the wild licenceof the peasants. It was the landlord who came in. 
“ Frieda ! " he called, and walked up and down theroom several times. 

Fortunately Frieda soon came back, she did not men-•tion K., she only complained about the peasants, andin the course of looking round for K. went behind thecounter, so that he was able to touch her foot. From


THE CASTLE

58
that moment he felt safe. Since Frieda made no refer-ence to K., however, the landlord was compelled to doit. And where is the Land Surveyor ? " he asked. 
He was probably courteous by nature, refined by con-stant and relatively free intercourse with men whowere much his superior, but there was remarkableconsideration in his tone to Frieda, which was all themore striking because in his conversation „ he did notcease to be an employer addressing a servant, and asaucy servant at that. “ The Land Surveyor — forgotall about him,'* said Frieda, setting her small foot onK.'s chest. "He must have gone out long ago." " ButI haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was inthe hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't inhere," said Frieda coolly. " Perhaps he's hidden some-where," went on the landlord. " From the impressionI had of him he's capable of a good deal." " He wouldhardly have the check to do that," said Frieda, pressingher foot down on K. There was a certain mirth andfreedom about her which K. had not previously re-marked, and quite unexpectedly it took the upperhand, for suddenly laughing she bent down to K. withthe words : " Perhaps he's hidden underneath here,"kissed him lightly and sprang up again saying with atroubled air ; " No, he’s not there." Then the land-lord, too, surprised K. when he said : "It bothers menot to know for certain that he's gone. Not only be-cause of Herr Klamm, but because of the rule of thehouse. And the rule applies to you, Fraulein Frieda,just as much as to me. Well, if you answer for the bar. 
I'll go through the rest of the rooms. Good night !Sleep well ! " He could hardly have left the room'before Frieda had turned out the electric light andwas under the counter beside K. "My darling I My


THE CASTLE

59
darling ! ** she whispered, but she did not touch him. 
As if swooning with love she lay on her back and stretchedout her arms ; time must have seemed endless to herin tJie prospect of her happiness, and she sighed ratherthan sang some little song or other. Then as K. stilllay absorbed in thought, she started up and began totug at him like a child : ** Come on, it's too close downhere," and they embraced each other, her little bodyburned in K.'s hands, in a state of unconsciousnesswhich K. tried again and again but in vain to masteras they rolled a little way, landing with a thud onKlamm's door, where they lay among the small puddlesof beer and other refuse gathered on the floor. There,hours went past, hours in which they breathed as one,in which their hearts beat as one, hours in which K. 
was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himselfor wandering into a strange country, farther than everman had wandered before, a country so strange thatnot even the air had anything in common with hisnative air, where one might die of strangeness, and yetwhose enchantment was such that one could only goon and lose oneself further. So it came to him not as ashock but as a faint glimmer of comfort when fromKlamm's room a deep, authoritative impersonal voicecalled for Frieda. " Frieda," whispered K. in Frieda'sear, passing on the stimmons. With a mechanicalinstinct of obedience Frieda made as if to spring to herfeet, then she remembered where she was, stretched her-self, laughing quietly, and said : " I'm not going, I'mnever going to him again." K. wanted to object, tourge her to go to Klamm, and began to fasten up her•disordered blouse, but he could not bring himself tospeak, he was too happy to have Frieda in his arms,too troubled also in his happiness, for it seemed to


THE CASTLE

6o
him that in letting Frieda go he would lose all he had. 
And as if his support had strengthened her Friedaclenched her fist and beat upon the door, crying : ** Tmwith the Land Surveyor ! That silenced Klamih atany rate, but K. started up, and on his knees besideFrieda gazed round him in the uncertain light of dawn. 
What had happened ? Where were his hopes ? Whatcould he expect from Frieda now that shethad betrayedeverything ? Instead of feeling his way with theprudence befitting the greatness of his enemy and of hisambition, he had spent a whole night wallowing inpuddles of beer, the smell of which was nearly over-powering. ** What have you done ? he said as if tohimself. '' We are both ruined.'' ‘‘ No," said Frieda," it's only me that's ruined, but then I've won you. 
Don't worry. But just look how these two arelaughing." "Who?" asked K., and turned round. 
There on the bar counter sat his two assistants, a littleheavy-eyed for lack of sleep, but cheerful. It was acheerfulness arising from a sense of duty well done. 
" What are you doing here ? " cried K. as if they wereto blame for everything. " We had to search for you,"explained the assistants, " since you didn't come backto the inn ; we looked for you at Barnabas's and finallyfound you here. We have been sitting her all night. 
Ours is no easy job." " It's in the day-time I needyou," said K., " not in the night. Clear out," " Butit's day-time now," said they without moving. It wasreally day, the doors into the courtyard were opened,the peasants came streaming in and with them Olga,whom K. had completely forgotten. Although herhair and clothes were in disorder Olga was as aleiiras on the previous evening, and her eyes flew to K. 
before she was well over the threshold. " Why did you


THE CASTLE

6l

not come home with me ? " she asked, almost weep-ing. All for a creature like that I " she said then,and repeated the remark several times. Frieda, whohad Vanished for a moment, came back with a smallbundle of clothing, and Olga moved sadly to one side. 

Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious shemeant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. 
K. walked with Frieda, and behind them the assist-ants ; that was the little procession. The peasantsdisplayed a great contempt for Frieda, which wasunderstandable, for she had lorded it over them hitherto ,*one of them even took a stick and held it as if to preventher from going out until she had jumped over it, but alook from her sufficed to quell him. When they wereout in the snow K. breathed a little more freely. It wassuch a relief to be in the open air that the journey seemedless laborious ; if he had been alone he would have goton still better. When he reached the inn he wentstraight to his room and lay down on the bed. Friedaprepared a couch for herself on the floor beside him. 
The assistants had pushed their way in too, and onbeing driven out came back through the window. K. 
was too weary to drive them out again. The land-lady came up specially to welcome Frieda, who hailedher as mother " ; their meeting was inexplicablyaffectionate, with kisses and long embracings. Therewas little peace and quietness to be had in the room,for the maids too came clumping in with their heavyboots, bringing or seeking various articles, and when-ever they wanted anything from the miscellaneousassortment on the bed they simply pulled it out from“under K. They greeted Frieda as one of themselves,in spite of all this coming and going K. stayed in bedthe whole day through, and the whole night. Frieda


THE CASTLE

62
performed little offices for him. When he got up atlast on the following morning he was much refreshed,and it was the fourth day since his arrival in the village. 


IV
H e would have liked an intimate talk with Frieda,but the assistants hindered this simply by theirimportunate presence, and Frieda, too, laughed andjoked with them from time to time. Otherwise theywere not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^ownin a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. 
They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedlyassured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor andto take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit ofthis intention, although with a good deal of whisperingand giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselvesinto a smaller compass, crouching together in the cornerso that in the dim light they looked like one largebundle. From his experience of them by daylight,however, K. was all too conscious that they were acuteobservers and never took their eyes off him, whetherthey were fooling like children and using their hands asspyglasses, or merely glancing at him while apparentlycompletely absorbed in grooming their beards, on whichthey spent much thought and which they were for evercomparing in length and thickness, calling on Frieda todecide between them. From his bed K. often watchedthe antics of all three with the completest indifference. 

When he felt himself well enough to leave his bed,they all ran to serve him. He was not yet strongenough to ward off their services, and noted that that


THE CASTLE

63
brought him into a state of dependence on them whichmight have evil consequences, but he could not help it. 
Nor was it really unpleasant to drink at the table thegood coffee which Frieda had brought, to warm him-self at the stove which Frieda had lit, and to have theassistants racing ten times up and down the stairs intheir awkwardness and zeal to fetch him soap andwater, comb, and looking-glass, and eventually even asmall glass of rum becausd he had hinted in a low voiceat his desire for one. 

Among all this giving of orders and being waited on,K. said, more out of good humour than any hope ofbeings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothingmore for the present, and I want to speak to FrauleinFrieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op-position on their faces he added* by way of excusingthem : We three shall go to tk ’llage Superintendentafterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'*Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning tosay before going ; ‘‘We could wait here," But K. 
answered : ‘‘I know, but I don't want you to wait here."
It annoyed him, however, and yet in a sense pleasedhim when Frieda, who had settled on his knee as soonas the assistants were gone, said ; ‘‘ What's yourobjection to the assistants, darling ? We don't need tohave any mysteries before them. They are true friends."“ Oh, true friends," said K., ‘‘ they keep spying onme the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable."" I believe I know what you mean," she said, and sheclung to his neck and tried to say something else butcould not go on speaking, and since their chair was^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. Therethey lay, but not in the forgetfulness of the previousnight. She was seeking and he was seeking, they raged


THE CASTLE

64
and contorted their faces and bored their heads intoeach other's bosoms in the urgency of seeking something,and their embraces and their tossing limbs did not availto make them forget, but only reminded them of whatthey sought ; like dogs desperately tearing up theground they tore at each other's bodies, and often,helplessly baffled, in a final effort to attain happinessthey nuzzled and tongued each other's , face. Sheerweariness stilled them at last ahd brought them gratitudeto each other. Then the maids came in. “ Look howthey're lying there," said one, and sympathetically casta coverlet over them. 

When somewhat later K. freed himself from thecoverlet and looked round, the two assistants — and hewas not surprised at that — ^were again in their corner,and with a finger jerked towards K. nudged each otherto a formal salute, but besides them the landlady wassitting near the bed knitting away at a stocking, aninfinitesimal piece of work hardly suited to her enormousbulk which almost darkened the room. " I've beenhere a long time," she said, lifting up her broad andmuch furrowed face which was, however, still roundedand might once have been beautiful. The words soundedlike a reproach, an ill-timed reproach, for K. had notdesired her to come. So he merely acknowledged themby a nod, and sat up. Frieda also got up, but left K. tolean over the landlady's chair, " If you want to speakto me,'’ said K. in bewilderment, " couldn't you put it offuntil after I come back from visiting the Superintendent ?1 have important business with him." " This is im-portant, believe me, sir," said the landlady, " your otherbusiness is probably only a question of work, but this*concerns a living person, Frieda, my dear maid." " Oh,if that's it," said K., " then of course you're right, but


THE CASTLE

65
I don't see why we can't be left to settle our own affairs."
Because I love her and care for her," said the land-lady, drawing Frieda's head towards her, for Frieda asshe 'stood only reached up to the landlady's shoulder. 
“ Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K.,“ I must do the same, and since not long ago Friedacalled my assistants true friends we are all friendstogether. I can tell you that what I would like bestwould be for Frieda and myself to get married, thesooner the better. I know, oh, I know that I'll neverbe able to make up to Frieda for all she has lost for mysake, her position in the Herrenhof and her friendshipwith Klarnm." Frieda lifted up her face, her eyes werefull of tears and had not a trace of triumph. " Why ?Why am I chosen out from other people ? " " What ? "asked K. and the landlady simultaneously. " She'supset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by theconjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness."And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda nowflung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there werenobody else in the room, and then weeping, but stillclinging to him, fell on her knees before him. While hecaressed Frieda's hair with both hands K. asked thelandlady ; "You seem to have no objection ? " "Youare a man of honour," said the landlady, who alsoliad tears in her eyes. She looked a little worn andbreathed with difficulty, but she found strength enoughto say ; " There's only the question now of what
guarantees you are to give Frieda, for great as is myrespect for you, you're a stranger here ; there's nobodyhere who can speak for you, your family circumstances•aren't known here, so some guarantee is necessary. Youmust see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched onit yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must3


66

THE CASTLE

lose through her association with you." " Of course,guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but they’ll bebest given before the notary, and at the same timeother officials of the Count’s will perhaps be concerned. 
Besides, before I'm married there’s something I mustdo. I must have a talk with Klamm." " That’s im-possible," said Frieda, raising herself a little and pressingclose to K., " what an idea ! " " But it myst be done,"said K., " if it’s impossible for me to manage it, youmust." " I can’t, K. ; I can’t," said Frieda. " Klammwill never talk to you. How can you even think ofsuch a thing ! " " And won't he talk to you ? " askedK, " Not to me either," said Frieda, " neither to younor to me, it’s simply impossible." She turned to thelandlady with outstretched arms ; "You see what he’sasking for ! " " You’re a strange person," said the
landlady, and she was an awe-inspiring figure now thatshe sat more upright, her legs spread out and herenormous knees projecting under her thin skirt, " youask for the imp)Ossible. " "Why is it impossible?"said K. " That’s what I’m going to tell you," said thelandlady in a tone which sounded as if her explanationwere less a final concession to friendship than the firstitem in a score of penalties she was enumerating, " that’swhat I shall be glad to let you know. Although I don’tbelong to the Castle, and am only a woman, only alandlady here in an inn of the lowest kind — it’s not ofthe very lowest but not far from it — and on thataccount you may not perhaps set much store by myexplanation, still I’ve kept my eyes open all my lifeand met many kinds of people and taken the wholeburden of the inn on my own shoulders, for Martin isno landlord although he’s a good man, and responsi-bility is a tiling he’ll never understand. It’s only his


THE CASTLE

67
carelessness, for instance, that youVe got to thank —for I was tired to death on that evening — for being herein the village at all, for sitting here on this bed in peaceand comfort." " What ? " said K., waking from a kindof absent-minded distraction, pricked more by curiositythan by anger. " It's only his carelessness you've gotto thank for it," cried the landlady again, pointing withher forefinger at K. Frieda tried to silence her. " Ican't help it," said the landlady with a swift turn of herwhole body. " The Land Surveyor asked me a questionand I must answer it. There's no other way of makinghim understand what we take for granted, that HerrKlamm will never speak to him — will never speak, did1 say ? — can never speak to him. Just listen to me, sir. 
Herr Klamm is a gentleman from the Castle, and that initself, without considering Klamm's position there atall, means that he is of very high rank. But what areyou, for whose marriage we are humbly consideringhere ways and means of getting permission ? You arenot from the Castle, you are not from the village, youaren't anything. Or rather, unfortunately, you aresomething, a stranger, a man who isn't wanted andis in everybody's way, a man who's always causingtrouble, a man who takes up the maids' room, a manwhose intentions are obscure, a man who has ruinedour dear little Frieda and whom we must unfortunatelyaccept as her husband. I don't hold all that up againstyou. You are what you are, and I have seen enough inmy lifetime to be able to face facts. But now considerwhat it is you ask. A man like Klamm is to talk withyou. It vexed me to hear that Frieda let you lookthrough the peephole, when she did that she was alreadycorrupted by you. But just tell me, how did you havethe face to look at Klamm ? You needn't answer, I


THE CASTLE

68
know you think you were quite equal to the occasion. 
You’re not even capable of seeing Klamm as he reallyis, that’s not merely an exaggeration, for I myself amnot capable of it either. Klamm is to talk to you, andyet Klamm doesn’t talk even to people from the village,never yet has he spoken a word himself to anyone inthe village. It was Frieda’s great distinction, a dis-tinction I’ll be proud of to my dying day„wthat he usedat least to call out her name, and that she could speakto him whenever she liked and was permitted thefreedom of the peephole, but even to her he nevertalked. And the fact that he called her name didn’tmean of necessity what one might think, he simplymentioned the name Frieda — ^who can tell what he wasthinking of ? — and that Frieda naturally came to himat once was her affair, and that she was admittedwithout let or hindrance was an act of grace on Klamm’spart, but that he deliberately summoned her is morethan one can maintain. Of course that’s all overnow for good. Klamm may perhaps call * Frieda ’ asbefore, that’s possible, but she’ll never again be ad-mitted to his presence, a girl who has thrown herselfaway upon you. And there’s just one thing, one thingmy poor head can’t understand, that a girl who had thehonour of being known as Klamm’s mistress — a wildexaggeration in my opinion — should have allowed youeven to lay a finger on her.”
” Most certainly, that’s remarkable,” said K., drawingFrieda to his bosom — she submitted at once althoughwith bent head — ” but in my opinion that only provesthe possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. 
You re quite right, for instance, in saying that I’m a'mere notliing compared with Klamm, and even thoughI insist on speaking to Klamm in spite of that, and am


THE CASTLE

69
not dissuaded even by your arguments, that does notmean at all that Tm able to face Klamm without a doorbetween us, or that I mayn't run from the room at thevery sight of him. But such a conjecture, even thoughwell founded, is no valid reason in my eyes for refrainingfrom the attempt. If I only succeed in holding myground there's no need for him to speak to me at all, itwill be sufficient for m^ to see what effect my wordshave on him, and if they have no effect or if he simplyignores them, I shall at any rate have the satisfactionof having spoken my mind freely to a great man. Butyou, with your wide knowledge of men and affairs,and .Frieda, who was only yesterday Klamm's mistress— I see no reason for questioning that title — couldcertainly procure me an interview with Klamm quiteeasily ; if it could be done in no other way I couldsurely see him in the Herrenhof, perhaps he's still there."
" It's impossible," said the landlady, " and I can seethat you're incapable of understanding why. But justtell me what you want to speak to Klamm about ?
" About Frieda, of course," said K. 

" About Frieda ? " repeated the landlady incom-prehendingly, and turned to Frieda. " Do you hearthat, Frieda, it's about you that he, he, wants to speakto Klamm, to Klamm I "
" Oh," said K., " you're a clever and admirablewoman, and yet every trifle upsets you. Well, there itis, I want to speak to him about Frieda ; that's notmonstrous, it's only natural. And you're quite wrong,too, in supposing that from the moment of my appear-ance Frieda has ceased to be of any importance toKlamm. You underestimate him if you suppose that. 
I'm well aware that it's impertinence in me to lay downthe law to you in this matter, but I must do it. I can't


THE CASTLE

70
be the cause of any alteration in Klamm's relation toFrieda. Either there was no essential relationshipbetween them— and that's what it amounts to if peopledeny that he was her honoured lover — in which casethere is still no relationship between them, or else therewas a relationship, and then how could I, a cipher inKlamm's eyes, as you rightly point out, how could Imake any difference to it ? One flies to such supposi-tions in the first moment of alarm, but the smallestreflection must correct one's bias. Anyhow, let ushear what Frieda herself thinks about it."
With a far-away look in her eyes and her cheek onK.'s breast, Frieda said : " It's certain, as mother says,that Klamm will have nothing more to do with me. 
But I agree that it's not because of you, darling, nothingof that kind could upset him. I think on the other handthat it was entirely his work that we found each otherunder the bar counter, we should bless that hour andnot curse it."
" If that is so," said K. slowly, for Frieda's wordswere sweet, and he shut his eyes a moment or two tolet their sweetness penetrate him, " if that is so, thereis less ground than ever to flinch from an interview withKlamm."
" Upon my word," said the landlady, with her nosein the air, you put me in mind of my own husband,you're just as childish and obstinate as he is. You'vebeen only a few days in the village and already youthink you know everything better than people who havespent their lives here, better than an old woman likeme, and better than Frieda who has seen and heardso much in the Merrenhof. I don't deny that it's'possible once in a while to achieve something in theteeth of every rule and tradition. I've never experi-


THE CASTLE

71
cnced anything of that kind myself, but I believe thereare precedents for it. That may well be, but it cer-tairily doesn't happen in the way you're trying to do it,simply by saying * no, no,' and sticking to your ownopinions and flouting the most well-meant advice. Doyou think it’s you I'm anxious about ? Did I botherabout you in the least so long as you were by yourself ?Even though it would jiave been a good thing andsaved a lot of trouble ? The only thing I ever said tomy husband about you was : ' Keep your distance
where he's concerned.' And I should have done thatmyself to this very day if Frieda hadn't got mixed upwith, your affairs. It's her you have to thank — whetheryou like it or not — for my interest in you, even for mynoticing your existence at all. And you can’t simplyshake me off, for I'm the only person who looks afterlittle Frieda, and you're strictly answerable to me. 
Maybe Frieda is right, and all that has happened isKlamm's will, but I have nothing to do with Klammhere and now. I shall never speak to him, he's quitebeyond my reach. But you're sitting here, keeping myFrieda, and being kept yourself — I don't see why Ishouldn’t tell you — by me. Yes, by me, young man,for let me see you find a lodging anywhere in this\ illage if I throw you out, even it were only in a dog-kennel."
" Thank you," said K., " that's frank and I believeyou absolutely. So my position is as uncertain as that,is it, and Frieda’s position, too ? "
" No ! " interrupted the landlady furiously. " Frieda'sposition in this respect has nothing at all to do with*yours. Frieda belongs to my house, and nobody isentitled to call her position here uncertain.”
" All right, all right," said K., " I'll grant you that. 



THE CASTLE

72
too, especially since Frieda for some reason I'm notable to fathom seems to be too afraid of you to interrupt. 
Stick to me then for the present. My position is quiteuncertain, you don't deny that, indeed you rather goout of your way to emphasise it. Like everything elseyou say, that has a fair proposition of truth in it, but itisn't absolutely true. For instance, I know where Icould get a very good bed if I, wanted it."
" Where? Where? " cried Frieda and the landladysimultaneously and so eagerly that they might have hadthe same motive for asking. 

" At Barnabas's," said K. 

" That scum ! " cried the landlady. " That rascallyscum ! At Barnabas's ! Do you hear — " and sheturned towards the corner, but the assistants had longquitted it and were now standing arm-in-arm behindher. And so now, as if she needed support, she seizedone of them by the hand : " Do you hear where the mangoes hob-nobbing, with the family of Barnabas ? Oh,certainly he'd get a bed there ; I only wished he'dstay'd there overnight instead of in the Herrenhof. Butwhere were you two ? "
" Madam," said K., before the assistants had timeto answer, " these are my assistants. But you'retreating them as if they were your assistants and mykeepers. In every other respect I'm willing at leastto argue the point with you courteously, but not wheremy assistants are concerned, that's too obvious a matter. 
I request you therefore not to speak to my assistants,and if my request proves ineffective I shall forbid myassistants to answer you."
" So I'm not allowed to speak to you," said the land-lady, and they laughed all three, the landlady scornfully,but with less anger than K. had expected, and the


THE CASTLE

73
assistants in their usual manner, which meant both muchand little and disclaimed all responsibility. 

Don't get angry," said Frieda, " you must try tounderstand why we're upset. I can put it in this way,it's all owing to Barnabas that we belong to each othernow. When I saw you for the first time in the bar —when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga — well, I knewsomething about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent toyou. I was indifferent not only to you but to nearlyeverything, yes, nearly everything. For at that time Iwas discontented about lots of things, and often annoyed,but it was a queer discontent and a queer annoyance. 
For instance, if one of the customers in the bar insultedme — and they were always after me — you saw whatkind of creatures they were, but there were many worsethan that, Klamm's servants weren't the worst — well,if one of them insulted me, what did that matter to me ?I regarded it as if it had happened years before, or as if ithad happened to someone else, or as if I had only heardtell of it, or as if I had already forgotten about it. But1 can't describe it, I can hardly imagine it now, sodifferent has everything become since losing Klamm."
And Frieda broke off short, letting her head dropsadly, folding her hands on her bosom. 

" You see," cried the landlady, and she spoke not asif in her own person but as if she had merely lent Friedaher voice ; she moved nearer, too, and sat close besideFrieda, " you see, sir, the results of your actions, anayour assistants too, whom I am not allowed to speak to,can profit by looking on at them. You've snatchedFrieda from the happiest state she had ever known, and*you managed to do that largely because in her childishsusceptibility she could not bear to see you arm-in-armwith Olga, and so apparently delivered hand and foot


THE CASTLE

74
to the Barnabas family. She rescued you from thatand sacrificed herself in doing so. And now that it'sdone, and Frieda has given up all she had for,, thepleasure of sitting on your knee, you come out withthis fine trump card that once you had the chance ofgetting a bed from Barnabas. That's by way of show-ing me that you're independent of me. I assure you,if you had slept in that hotjse you would be so inde-pendent of me that in the twinkling of an eye you wouldbe put out of this one."
" I don't know what sins the family of Barnabas havecommitted," said K., carefully raising Frieda — whodrooped as if lifeless — setting her slowly down on thebed and standing up himself, " you may be right aboutthem, but I know that I was right in asking you to leaveFrieda and me to settle our own affairs. You talked thenabout your care and affection, yet I haven't seen muchof that, but a great deal of hatred and scorn and for-bidding me your house. If it was your intention toseparate Frieda from me or me from Frieda it was quitea good move, but all the same I think it won't succeed,and if it does succeed — it's my turn now to issue vaguethreats— you'll repent it. As for the lodging you favourme with — you can only mean this abominable hole —it’s not at all certain that you do it of your own free will,it’s much more likely that the authorities insist upon it. 
I shall now inform them that I have been told to go —and if I am allotted other quarters you'll probably fecirelieved, but not so much as I will myself. And nowI'm going to discuss this and other business with theSuperintendent, please be so good as to look afterFrieda at least, whom you have reduced to a bad enoughstate w'ith your so-called motherly counsel."
Then he turned to the assistants. " Come along,"


THE CASTLE

75
he said, taking Klamm's letter from its nail and makingfor the door. The landlady looked at him in silence,and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say :
There's something else to take away with you, forwhatever you say and however you insult an old womanlike me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. That'smy sole reason for telling you now that your ignoranceof the local situation is so appalling that it makes myhead go round to listen to you and compare your ideasand opinions with the real state of things. It's a kindof ignorance which can't be enlightened at one attempt,and perhaps never can be, but there's a lot you couldlearn jf you would only believe me a little and keepyour own ignorance constantly in mind. For instance,you would at once be less unjust to me, and you wouldbegin to have an inkling of the shock it was to me — ashock from which I'm still suffering — when I realisedthat my dear little Frieda had, so to speak, deserted theeagle for the snake in the grass, only the real situationis much worse even than that, and I have to keep ontr)dng to forget it so as to be able to speak civilly toyou at all. Oh, now you're angry again ! No, don'tgo away yet, listen to this one appeal ; wherever youmay be, never forget that you’re the most ignorantperson in the village, and be cautious ; here in thishouse where Frieda's presence saves you from harmyou can drivel on to your heart’s content, for instance,here you can explain to us how you mean to get aninterview with Klamm, but I entreat you, I entreat you,don't do it in earnest."
She stood up, tottering a little with agitation, wentftver to K., took his hand and looked at him imploringly. 
'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why youshould stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. If


THE CASTLE

76
as you say, it's impossible for me to speak to Klamm,I won't manage it in any case whether I'm entreated ornot. But if it proves to be possible, why shouldn't I doit, especially as that would remove your main objectionand so make your other premises questionable. Ofcourse I'm ignorant, that's an unshaken truth and asad truth for me, but it gives me all the advantage ofignorance, which is greater^ daring, and so I'm pre-pared to put up with my ignorance, evil consequencesand all, for some time to come, so long as my strengthholds out. But these consequences really affect nobodybut myself, and that's why I simply can't understandyour pleading. I'm certain you would always look afterFrieda, and if I were to vanish from Frieda's ken youcouldn't regard that as anything but good luck. Sowhat are you afraid of? Surely you're not afraid — anignorant man thinks everything possible " — here K. 
flung the door open — ** surely you're not afraid forKlamm ? " The landlady gazed after him in silence as heran down the staircase with the assistants following him. 


V
T O his own surprise K. had little difficulty in obtain-ing an interview with the Superintendent. Hesought to explain this to himself by the fact that, goingby his experience hitherto, official intercourse with theauthorities for him was always very easy. This wascaused on the one hand by the fact that the wordhad obviously gone out once and for all to treat hiscase wdth the external marks of indulgence, and on theother, by the admirable autonomy of the service, which


THE CASTLE

77
one divined to be peculiarly effective precisely whereit was not visibly present. At the mere thought ofthofe facts, K. was often in danger of considering hissituation hopeful ; nevertheless, after such fits of easyconfidence, he would hasten to tell himself that justthere lay his danger. 

Direct intercourse with the authorities was notparticularly difficult then, for well organised as theymight be, all they did was to guard the distant andinvisible interests of distant and invisible masters, whileK. fought for something vitally near to him, for himself,and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on hisown ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besideshe fought not only for himself, but clearly for otherpowers as well which he did not know, but in which,without infringing the regulations of the authorities,he was permitted to believe. But now by the fact thatthey had at once amply met his wishes in all unim-portant matters — and hitherto only unimportantmatters had come up — they had robbed him of thepossibility of light and easy victories, and with thatof the satisfaction which must accompany them andthe well-grounded confidence for further and greaterstruggles which must result from them. Instead, theylet K. go anywhere he liked — of course only withinthe village — ^and thus pampered and enervated him,ruled out all possibility of conflict, and transposed himto an unofficial, totally unrecognised, troubled, andalien existence. In this life it might easily happen, ifhe were not always on his guard, that one day or other,in spite of the amiability of the authorities and the* scrupulous fulfilment of all his exaggeratedly lightduties, he might — deceived by the apparent favourshown him — conduct himself so imprudently that he


THE CASTLE

78
might get a fall ; and the authorities, still ever mildand friendly, and as it were against their will, but inthe name of some public regulation unknown to hjim,might have to come and clear him out of the way. 
And what was it, this other life to which he was con-signed ? Never yet had K. seen vocation and life sointerlaced as here, so interlaced that sometimes onemight think that they had exchanged places. Whatimportance, for example, had the power, merely formalup till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services,compared with the very real power which Klammpossessed in K.’s bedroom ? So it came about that whilea light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate .care-lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contactwith the authorities, one needed in everything else thegreatest caution, and had to look round on every sidebefore one made a single step. 

K. soon found his opinion of the authorities of theplace confirmed when he went to see the Superintendent. 
The Superintendent, a kindly, stout, clean-shaven man,was laid up ; he was suffering from a severe attack ofgout, and received K. in bed. “ So here is our LandSurveyor,*' he said, and tried to sit up, failed in theattempt and flung himself back again on the cushions,pointing apologetically to his leg. In the faint light ofthe room, where the tiny windows were still furtherdarkened by curtains, a noiseless, almost shadowingwoman pushed forward a chair for K. and placed itbeside the bed. Take a seat. Land Surveyor, take aseat," said the Superintendent, " and let me know yourwishes." K. read out Klamm's letter and adjoined afew remarks to it. Again he had this sense of extra- 'ordinary ease in intercourse with the authorities. Theyseemed literally to bear every burden, one could lay


THE CASTLE

79
everything on their shoulders and remain free anduntouched oneself. As if he, too, felt this in his way,the Superintendent made a movement of discomforton ihe bed. At length he said : “I know about thewhole business as, indeed, you have remarked. Thereason why Tve done nothing is, firstly, that Tve beenunwell, and secondly, that you’ve been so long in coming ;I thought finally that you had given up the business. 
But now that you’ve been ^o kind as to look me up, reallyI must tell you the plain unvarnished truth of the matter. 
You’ve been taken on as Land Surveyor, as you say,but, unfortunately, we have no need of a Land Sur-veyor. There wouldn’t be the least use for one here. 
The frontiers of our little state are marked out and allofficially recorded. So what should we do with a LandSurveyor ) ” Though he had not given the matter amoment’s thought before, K. was convinced now atthe bottom of his heart that he had expected some suchresponse as this. Exactly for that reason he was ableto reply immediately : ” This is a great surprise for me. 
It throws all my calculations out. I can only hope thatthere’s some misunderstanding.” ” No, unfortunately,”said the Superintendent, ” it’s as I've said.” ” Buthow is that possible ? ” cried K. ” Surely I haven’tmade this endless journey just to be sent back again.”” That’s another question,” replied the Superintendent,” which isn’t for me to decide, but how this misunder-standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. 
In such a large governmental office as the Count’s, itmay occasionally happen that one department ordainsthis, another that ; neither knows of the other, and•though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, itcomes by its nature too late, and so every now andthen a trifling miscalculation arises. Of course that


8o

THE CASTLE

applies only to the pettiest little affairs, as for exampleyour case. In great matters I've never known of anyerror yet, but even little affairs are often painful enough. 
Now as for your case, I'll be open with you about itshistory, and make no official mystery of it — ^I'm notenough of the official for that. I'm a farmer and alwayswill remain one. A long time ago — I had only beenSuperintendent for a few months — there cape an order,
I can't remember from whafe department, in whichin the usual categorical way of the gentlemen up there,it was made known that a Land Surveyor was to becalled in, and the municipality were instructed to holdthemselves ready for the plans and measurementsnecessary for his work. This order obviously couldn'thave concerned you, for it was many years ago, andI shouldn't have remembered it if I weren't ill just nowand with ample time in bed to think of the most absurdthings — Mizzi," he said, suddenly interrupting hisnarrative, to the woman who was still flitting about theroom in incomprehensible activity, please have a lookin the cabinet, perhaps you'll find the order." "Yousec, it belongs to my first months here," he explained toK., " at that time I still filed everything away." Thewoman opened the cabinet at once. K. and the Super-intendent looked on. The cabinet was crammed full ofpapers. When it was opened two large packages ofpapers rolled out, tied in round bundles, as one usuallybinds firewood ; the woman sprang back in alarm. 

" It must be down below, at the bottom," said theSuperintendent, directing operations from the bed. 
Gathering the papers in both arms the woman obedientlythrew them all out of the cabinet so as to read those at •the bottom. The papers now covered half the floor. 

" A great deal of work is got through here," said the


THE CASTLE

8l

Superintendent nodding his head, “ and that's only asmall fraction of it. Tve put, away the most importantpile in the shed, but the great mass of it has simply goneastray. Who could keep it all together? But there'spiles and piles more in the shed." " Will you be ableto find the order ? " he said, turning again to his wife ;“ you must look for a document with the word LandSurveyor uixlerlined in blue pencil." " It's too dark,"said the woman, " I'll fotch a candle," and she stampedthrough the papers to the door. " My wife is a greathelp to me," said the Superintendent, " in these difficultofficial affairs, and yet we can never quite keep up withthem. True, I have another assistant for the writingthat* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it'simpossible to get things shipshape, there's always alot of business that has to be left lying, it has been putaway in that chest there," and he pointed to anothercabinet. " And just now, when I'm laid up, it has gotthe upper hand," he said, and lay back with a weary yetproud air. " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that thewoman had now returned with the candle and waskneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn'tI help your wife to look for it ? " The Superintendentsmilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don'twant to make any parade of official secrecy before you,but to let you look through these papers yourself — no,I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room,only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; itlooked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super-intendent were dozing. A faint rapping on the doormade K. turn round. It was of course the assistants. 
All the same they showed already some of the effects oftheir training, they did not rush at once into the room,but whispered at first through the door which was


82

THE CASTLE

slightly ajar : " It's cold out here." " Who's that ? "asked the Superintendent, starting up. It's only myassistants," replied K. " I don't know where to askthem to wait for me, it’s too cold outside and here theywould be in the way." " They won't disturb me,” saidthe Superintendent indulgently. " Ask them to comein. Besides I know them. Old acquaintances." " Butthey're in my way,” K. replied bluntly, letting his gazewander from the assistants to #4:he Superinfendent andback again, and finding on the faces of all three thesame smile. " But seeing you're here as it is,” he wenton experimentally, " stay and help the Superintendent'slady there to look for a document with the word LandSurveyor underlined in blue pencil.” The Superin-tendent raised no objection. What had not been per-mitted to K. was allowed to the assistants ; they threwthemselves at once on the papers, but they did not somuch seek for anything as rummage about in the heap,and while one was spelling out a document the otherwould immediately snatch it out of his hand. Thewoman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, sheseemed to have completely given up looking, in anycase the candle was standing quite far away from her. 

” The assistants,” said the Superintendent with aself-complacent smile, which seemed to indicate thathe had the lead, though nobody was in a position even toassume this, ” they're in your way then ? Yet they'reyour own assistants.” ” No,” replied K. coolly, " theyonly ran into me here,” " Ran into you,” said he ;" you mean, of course, were assigned to you.” " Allright then, were assigned to me,” said K., " but theymight as well have fallen from the sky, for all thethought that was spent in choosing them.” " Nothinghere is done without taking thought,” said the Super-


THE CASTLE

8 ?
intendent, actually forgetting the pain in his foot andsitting up. Nothing ! ** said K., " and what aboutmy being summoned here then ? " '' Even your being
summoned was carefully considered," said the Super-intendent ; "it was only certain auxiliary circum-stances that entered and confused the matter, Til proveit to you from the official papers." " The papers willnot be fouad," said K. " Not be found? " said theSuperintendent. " Mizzi, please hurry up a bit ! StillI can tell you the story even without the papers. Wereplied with thanks to the order that Tve mentionedalready, saying that we didn't need a Land Surveyor. 
But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached theoriginal department — I'll call it A — but by mistake wentto another department, B. So Department A remainedwithout an answer, but unfortunately our full reply didn'treach B either ; whether it was that the order itself wasnot enclosed by us, or whether it got lost on the way —it was certainly not lost in my department, that I canvouch for — in any case all that arrived at DepartmentB was the covering letter, in which was merely notedthat the enclosed order, unfortunately an impracticableone, was concerned with the engagement of a LandSurveyor. Meanwhile Department A was waiting forour answer, they had, of course, made a memorandumof the case, but as excusably enough often happens andis bound to happen even under the most efficienthandling, our correspondent trusted to the fact thatwe would answer him, after which he would eithersummon the Land Surveyor, or else if need be writeus further about the matter. As a result he neverthought of referring to his memorandum and the wholething fell into oblivion. But in Department B thecovering letter came into the hands of a correpondent. 



THE CASTLE

84
tamed for his conscientiousness, Sordini hy name* anItalian ; it is incomprehensible even to me, thoughI am one of the initiated, why a man of his capacitiesis left in an almost subordinate position. This Sordininaturally sent back the unaccompanied covering letterfor completion. Now months, if not years, had passedby this time since that first communication from Depart-ment A, which is understandable enough, for when —which is the rule — a document* goes the proper route,it reaches the department at the outside in a day andis settled that day, but when it once in a while losesits way then in an organisation so efficient as ours itsproper destination must be sought for literally i^ithdesperation, otherwise it mightn't be found ; and then,well then the search may last really for a long time. 
Accordingly, when we got Sordini's note we had onlya vague memory of the affair, there were only two ofus to do the work at that time. Mizzi and myself, theteacher hadn't yet been assigned to us, we only keptcopies in the most important instances, so we could onlyreply in the most vague terms that we knew nothing ofthis engagement of a Land Surveyor and that as far aswe knew there was no need for one. 

“ But," here the Superintendent interrupted himselfas if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, oras if at least it were possible that he had gone too far," doesn't the story bore you ? "
No," said K., " it amuses me."
Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not
telling it to amuse you."
" It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives mean insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certaincircumstances may decide the life of a human being."
" You haven’t been given any insight into that yet,"


THE CASTLE

85
replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can goon with my story. Naturally Sordini was not satisfiedwith our reply. I admire the man, although he is aplague to me. He literally distrusts everyone ; even if,for instance, he has come to know somebody, throughcountless circumstances, as the most reliable man in theworld, he distrusts him as soon as fresh circumstancesarise, as i^ he didn't want to know him, or rather as ifhe wanted to know that he was a scoundrel. I considerthat right and proper, an official must behave like that ;unfortunately with my nature I can't follow out thisprinciple ,* you see yourself how frank I am with you, asti^nger, about those things, I can't act in any otherway. But Sordini, on the contrary, was seized by sus-picion when he read our reply. Now a large corre-spondence began to grow. Sordini enquired how Ihad suddenly recalled that a Land Surveyor shouldn'tbe summoned. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendidmemory, that the first suggestion had come from thechancellory itself (but that it had come from a differentdepartment we had of course forgotten long beforethis). Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentionedthis official order now ? ' I replied : ‘ Because I hadjust remembered it.' Sordini : ‘ That was very extra-ordinary.' Myself : ‘ It was not in the least extra-
ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ;
‘ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem-bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't
exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.'Sordini : ‘ But there must be a memorandum extantrelating to this first communication, and there wasn'tone extant.' That drew me up, for that an error shouldhappen in Sordini's department I neither dared tomaintain nor to believe. Perhaps, my dear Land


86

THE CASTLE

Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini inyour mind, that in consideration of my assertion heshould have been moved at least to make enquiriesthe other departments about the affair. But that isjust what would have been wrong ; I don't want anyblame to attach to this man, no, not even in yourthoughts. It's a working principle of the Head Bureauthat the very possibility of error must be r^Jed out ofaccount. This ground princij5le is justified by theconsummate organisation of the whole authority, andit is necessary if the maximum speed in transactingbusiness is to be attained. So it wasn't within Sordini'spower to make enquiries in other departments, besidesthey simply wouldn't have answered, because theywould have guessed at once that it was a case of huntingout a possible error."
" Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you witha question," said K. " Did you not mention oncebefore a Control Authority ? From your descriptionthe whole economy is one that would rouse one'sapjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing."
' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " butmultiply your strictness a thousand times and it wouldstill be nothing compared with the strictness which theAuthority imposes on itself. Only a total strangercould ask a question like yours. Is there a ControlAuthority ? There are only control authorities. Franklyit isn’t their function to hunt out errors in the vulgarsense, for errors don't happen, and even when once ina while an error does happen, as in your case, who cansay finally that it's an error 7 "
" This is news indeed ! " cried K. 

" It’s very old news to me," said the Superintendent. 
" Not unlike yourself Tm convinced that an error has


THE CASTLE

87
occurred, and as a result Sordini is quite ill with despair,and the first Control Officials, whom we have to thankfoe discovering the source of error, recognise that thereis an error. But who can guarantee that the secondControl Officials will decide in the same way and thethird lot and all the others ? **
That may be,*' said K. I would much rathernot mix in 4hese speculations yet, besides this is the firstmention I've heard of those Control Officials andnaturally I can't understand them yet. But I fancythat two things must be distinguished here : firstly,what is transacted in the offices and can be construedagain officially this way or that, and secondly, my ownactual person, me myself, situated outside of the officesand threatened by their encroachments, which are someaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious-ness of the danger. The first evidently is covered bywhat you. Superintendent, tell me in such extraordinaryand disconcerting detail ; all the same I would like tohear a word now about myself."
"I'm coming to that too," said the Superintendent," but you couldn't understand it without my givinga few more preliminary details. My mentioning theControl Officials just now was premature. So I mustturn back to the discrepancies with Sordini. As Isaid, my defence gradually weakened. But wheneverSordini has in his hands even the slightest hold againstanyone, he has as good as w'on, for then his vigilance,energy, and alertness are actually increased and it's aterrible moment for the victim, and a glorious one forthe victim's enemies. It's only because in other cir-cumstances I have experienced this last feeling that I'mable to speak of him as I do. All the same I have nevermanaged yet to come within sight of him. He can't


THE CASTUF

88
get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firomthe descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall iscovered with columns of documents tied together, piledon top of one another ; those are only the documentsthat Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundlesof papers arc continually being taken away and broughtin, and all in great haste, those columns are alwaysfalling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes,following fast on one another, that have come todistinguish Sordini's workroom. Yes, Sordini is aworker and he gives the same scrupulous care to thesmallest case as to the greatest."
"Superintendent," said K., "you always call, mycase one of the smallest, and yet it has given hosts ofofficials a great deal of trouble, and if, perhaps, it wasunimportant at the start, yet through the diligence ofofficials of Sordini 's type it has grown into a great aflFair. 
Very much against my will, unfortunately, for myambition doesn’t run to seeing columns of documents, allabout me, rising and crashing together, but to workingquietly at my drawing-board as a humble Land Surveyor."
" No," said the Superintendent, " it’s not at all agreat affair, in that respect you’ve no ground for com-plaint — it’s one of the least important among the leastimportant. The importance of a case is not deter-mined by the amount of work it involves, you’re farfrom understanding the authorities if you believe that. 
But even if it’s a question of the amount of work, yourcase would remain one of the slightest ; ordinary cases,those without any so-called errors I mean, provide farmore work and far more profitable work as well. 
Besides you know absolutely nothing yet of the actualwork which was caused by your case. I’ll tell youabout that now. Well, presently Sordini left me out


THE CASTLE

89
of count, but the clerks arrived, and every day a formalenquiry involving the most prominent members of thecd^nmunity was held in the Herrenhof. The majoritystuck by me, only a few held back — the question of aLand Surveyor appeals to peasants — they scented secretplots and injustices and what not, found a leader, noless, and Sordini was forced by their assertions to theconviction lhat if I had^ brought the question forwardin the Town Council, every voice wouldn't have beenagainst the summoning of a Land Surveyor. So acommonplace — namely, that a Land Surveyor wasn’tneeded — was turned after all into a doubtful matter atleast. A man called Brunswick distinguished himselfespecially, you don't know him, of course ; probablyhe’s not a bad man, only stupid and fanciful, he's ason-in-law of Lasemann's."
'' Of the Master Tanner ? " asked K., and he describedthe full-bearded man whom he had seen at Lasemann's. 

" Yes, that's the man," said the Superintendent. 

" I know his wife, too," said K., a little at random. 

" That's possible," replied the Superintendent briefly. 

" She's beautiful," said K., " but rather pale andsickly. She comes, of course, from the Castle ? " Itwas half a question. 

The Superintendent looked at the clock, poured somemedicine into a spoon, and gulped at it hastily. 

" You only know the official side of the Castle ? "asked K. bluntly. 

"That's so," replied the Superintendent, with anironical and yet grateful smile, " and it's the mostimportant. And as for Brunswick ; if we could excludehim from the Council we would almost all be glad, andLasemann not least. But at that time Brunswickgained some influence, he's not an orator of course, but


THE CASTLE

90
a shoutcf ; but even that can do a lot. And so it cameabout that I was forced to lay the matter before the TownCouncil ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediatetriumph, for of course the Town Council refused by alarge majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. 
That, too, was a long time ago, but the whole time sincethe matter has never been allowed to rest, partly owingto Sordini's conscientiousness,^who by thecnost painfulsifting of data sought to fathom the motives of th'">majority no less than the opposition, partly owing toBrunswick's stupidity and ambition, who had severalpersonal acquaintances among the authorities whom heset working with fresh inventions of his fancy. Sordini,at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick— how could Brunswick deceive Sordini ? — but simplyto prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting ofdata was necessary, and long before it was endedBrunswick had already thought out something new ;he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes withhis stupidity. And now I come to a peculiar character-istic of our administrative apparatus. Along with itsprecision it's extremely sensitive as well. When anail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it mayhappen, even before the matter has been fully con-sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes insome unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be foundany longer later on, a decision that settles the matter,if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. It'sas if the administrative apparatus were unable anylonger to bear the tension, the year-long irritationcaused by the same affair — probably trivial in itself —and had hit upon the decision by itself, without theassistance of the officials. Of course a miracle didn'thappen and certainly it was some clerk who hit upon


THE CASTLE

91

the solution or the unwritten decision, but in any caseit couldn’t be discovered by us, at least by us here, oreven by the Head Bureau, which clerk had decided inthis case and on what grounds. The Control Officialsonly discovered that much later, but we will never learnit ; besides by this time it would scarcely interest any-body. Now, as I said, it’s just these decisions that aregenerally exoellent. The only annoying thing aboutthem — it’s usually the case with such things — is that onelearns too late about them and so in the meantime keepson still passionately canvassing things that were decidedlong ago. I don’t know whether in your case a de-cision of this kind happened — some people say yes*others no — but if it had happened then the summonswould have been sent to you and you would have madethe long journey to this place, much time would havepassed, and in the meanwhile Sordini would have beenworking away here all the time on the same case untilhe was exhausted, Brunswick would have been intriguing,and I would have been plagued by both of them. Ionly indicate this possibility, but I know the followingfor a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile

that a query had gone out from the Department Ato the Town Council many years before regarding aL.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up tillthen. A new enquiry was sent to me, and now thewhole business was really cleared up. Department Awas satisfied with my answer that a Land Surveyor wasnot needed, and Sordini was forced to recognise thathe had not been equal to this case and, innocently itis true, had got through so much nerve-racking work’ for nothing. If new work hadn’t come rushing inas ever from every side, and if your case hadn’t beena very unimportant case — one might almost say the


THE CASTLE

92
least important among the unimportant — ^we mig^all of us liave breathed freely again, I fancy eveSordini himself ; Brunswick was the only one thatgrumbled, but that was only ridiculous. And nowimagine to yourself, Land Surveyor, my dismay whenafter the fortunate end of the whole business — and sincethen, too, a great deal of time had passed by — suddenlyyou appear and it begins to look as if the whole thingmust begin all over again. S^ou*!! understand of coursethat Tm firmly resolved, so far as Tm concerned, not tolet that happen in any case ? ''
Certainly,** said K., “ but I understand better stillthat a terrible abuse of my case, and probably of thelaw, is being carried on. As for me, I shall know howto protect myself against it.**
“ How will you do it ? ** asked the Superintendent. 

Tm not at liberty to reveal that,** said K. 

'' I don*t want to press myself upon you,** said theSuperintendent, only I would like you to reflect thatin me you have — I won*t say a friend, for we*re completestrangers of course — but to some extent a business friend. 
The only thing I will not agree to is that you should betaken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you candraw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent ofmy power, which isn’t great.**
** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that1 shan’t be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm LandSurveyor already, here is Klamm’s letter.**
Klamm’s letter,** said the Superintendent. “ That’svaluable and worthy of respect on account of Klamm’ssignature which seems to be genuine, but all the same —yet 1 won’t dare to advance it on my own unsupportedword. Mizzi," he called, and then : “ But what areyou doing ? ”


THE CASTLE

93
the assistants, left so long unnoticed, hadclearly not found the paper they were looking for,and had then tried to shut everything up again in thecabinet, but on account of the confusion and super-abundance of papers had not succeeded. Then theassistants had hit upon the idea which they werecarrying out now. They had laid the cabinet on itsback on the ^oor, crammed all the documents in, thenalong with Mizzi had kAelt on the cabinet door andwere trying now in this way to get it shut. 

So the paper hasn’t been found,” said the Super-intendent. ” A pity, but you know the story already ;really we don’t need the paper now, besides it willcertainly be found sometime yet ; probably it’s at theteacher’s place, there’s a great pile of papers there too. 
But come over here now with the candle, Mizzi, andread this letter for me,”
Mizzi went over and now looked still more grey andinsignificant as she sat on the edge of the bed and leanedagainst the strong, vigorous man, who put his armround her. In the candlelight only her pinched facewas cast into relief, its simple and austere lines softenedby nothing but age. Hardly had she glanced at theletter when she clasped her hands lightly and said :“ From Klamm.” Then they read the letter together,whispered for a moment, and at last, just as the assistantsgave a ” Hurrah ! ” for they had finally got the cabinetdoor shut — ^which earned them a look of silent gratitudefrom Mizzi — the Superintendent said :
” Mizzi is quite of my opinion and now I am atliberty to express it. This letter is in no sense an officialletter, but only a private letter. That can be clearly seenin the very mode of address : ‘ My dear Sir.’ More-over, there isn’t a single word in it showing that you’ve


THE CASTLE

94
been taken on as Land Surveyor ; on the contrary it'sall about state service in general, and even that is notabsolutely guaranteed, as you know, that is, the task ofproving that you are taken on is laid on you. Finally,you are officially and expressly referred to me, theSuperintendent, as your immediate superior, for moredetailed information, which, indeed, has in great partbeen given already. To anyone who k^ows how toread official communications,* and consequently knowsstill better how to read unofficial letters, all this isonly too clear. That you, a stranger, don't knowit doesn't surprise me. In general the letter meansnothing more than that Klamm intends to take apersonal interest in you if you should be taken intothe state service."
" Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letterso well that nothing remains of it but a signature on ablank sheet of paper. Don't you see that in doing this youdepreciate Klamm's name, which you pretend to respect? "
" You misunderstand me," said the Superintendent," I don't misconstrue the meaning of the letter, myreading of it doesn't disparage it, on the contrary. Aprivate letter from Klamm has naturally far moresignificance than an official letter, but it hasn't preciselythe kind of significance that you attach to it."
" Do you know Schwarzer ? " asked K. 

" No," replied the Superintendent. " Perhaps youknow him, Mizzi ? You don't know him either ? No,we don't know him."
" That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of theunder-castellans."
" My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin-tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons ofall the under-castellans ? "


THE CASTLE

95
" Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take myword that he is one. I had a sharp encounter with thisSchwarzcr on the very day of my arrival. Afterwards hemade a telephone enquiry of an under-castellan called Fritzand received the information that I was engaged as LandSurveyor. How do you explain that, Superintendent? "Very simply," replied the Superintendent. " Youhaven't once yp till now come into real contact withour authorities. All those* contacts of yours have beenillusory, but owing to your ignorance of the circum-stances you take them to be real. And as for the tele-phone. As you see, in my place, though I've certainlyenough to do with the authorities, there's no telephone. 
In inns and suchlike places it may be of real use, asmuch use say as a penny-in-the-slot musical instrument,but it's nothing more than that. Have you ever tele-phoned here ? Yes ? Well, then perhaps you'll under-stand what I say. In the Castle the telephone worksbeautifully of course. I've been told it's going there allthe time, that naturally speeds up the work a greatdeal. We can hear this continual telephoning in ourtelephones down here as a humming and singing, youmust have heard it too. Now this humming and sing-ing transmitted by our telephones is the only real andreliable thing you'll hear, everything else is deceptive. 
There's no fixed connection with the Castle, no centralexchange which transmits our calls further. Whenanybody calls up the Castle from here the instrumentsin all the subordinate departments ring, or ratherthey would all ring if practically all the departments —
I know it for a certainty — didn't leave their receivers©fl. Now and then, however, a fatigued official mayfeel the need of a little distraction, especially in theevenings and at night ana may hang tne receiver on. 



THE CASTLE

96
Then we get an answer, but an answer of course that'smerely a practical joke. And that's very understand-able too. For who would take the responsibility ofinterrupting, in the middle of the night, the extremelyimportant work up there that goes on furiously thewhole time, with a message about his own little privatetroubles ? I can't comprehend how even a strangercan imagine that when he calls up Sordini, for example,it's really Sordini that answers. Far more probably it'sa little copying clerk from an entirely different depart-ment. On the other hand, it may certainly happenonce in a blue moon that when one calls up the littlecopying clerk Sordini will answer himself. Then finallythe best thing is to fly from the telephone before thefirst sound comes through."
" I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. 
" I couldn't know of all these peculiarities, but I didn'tput much confidence in those telephone conversations and1 was always aware that the only things of real importancewere those that happened in the Castle itself."
" No," said the Superintendent, holding firmly on totlic word, " these telephone replies certainly have ameaning, why shouldn't they ? How could a messagegiven by an official from the Castle be unimportant?As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. Allthose utterances have no official significance ; whenyou attach official significance to them you go astray. 
On the other hand, their private significance in afriendly or hostile sense is very great, generally greaterthan an official communication could ever be."
" Good," said K. " Granted that all this is so, Ishould have lots of good friends in the Castle : lookedat rightly the sudden inspiration of that departmentall these years ago — saying that a Land Surveyor


THE CASTLE

97
should be asked to come — was an act of friendship towardsmyself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed byanother, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed hereand then threatened with being thrown out again."
" There's a certain amount of truth in your viewof the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're rightin thinking that the pronouncements of the Castlearc not to be taken literally. But caution is alwaysnecessary, not only here, and always the more necessarythe more important the pronouncement in questionhappens to be. But when you went on to talk aboutbeing enticed, I ceased to fathom you. If you hadfollowed my explanation more carefully, then you musthave seen that the question of your being summonedhere is far too difficult to be settled here and now in thecourse of a short conversation."
" So the only remaining conclusion," said K., "isthat everything is very uncertain and insoluble, in-cluding my being thrown out."
" Who would take the risk of throwing you out. LandSurveyor ? " asked the Superintendent. " The veryuncertainty about your summons guarantees you themost courteous treatment, only you're too sensitive by.ill appearances. Nobody keeps you here, but thatsurely doesn't amount to throwing you out."
" Oh, Superintendent," said K., " now again you'retaking far too simple a view of the case. I'll enumeratefor your benefit a few of the things that keep me here ; thesacrifice I made in leaving my home, the long and difficultjourney, the well-grounded hopes I built on my engage-ment here, my complete lack of means, the impossibilitylifter tliis of finding some other suitable job at home, andlast but not least my fiancee, who lives here."
" Oh, Frieda I " said the Superintendent without
4


THE CASTLE

%
showing any surprise. ** I know. But Frieda wouldfollow you anywhere. As for the rest of what you said,some consideration will be necessary and TU comnwini-cate with the Castle about it. If a decision should become to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogateyou again, Til send for you. Is that agreeable to you ?
‘‘ No, absolutely,** said K. I don*t want any actof favour ffon»jthe Castle, but my rights.**
** Mizzi,** the Superintendent said to Viis wife, whostill sat pressed against him, and lost in a day-dreamwas playing with Klamm*s letter, which she had foldedinto the shape of a little boat — K. snatched it from herin alarm. ** Mizzi, my foot is beginning to throb again,we must renew the compress.**
K. got up. Then 1*11 take my leave,** he said. 
** Hm,** said Mizzi, who was already preparing apoultice, the last one was drawing too strongly.** K. 
turned away. At his last words the assistants with theirusual misplaced zeal to be useful h^aThrown open bothwings of the door. To protect the sickroom from thestrong draught of cold air which was rushing in, K. 
had to be content with making the Superintendent ahasty bow. Then, pushing the assistants in front of him,he rushed out of the room and quickly closed the door. 


VI
B efore the inn the landlord was waiting for him. 

Without being questioned he would not haveventured to address him, accordingly K. asked what*he wanted. “ Have you found new lodgings yet ? *’asked the landlord, looking at ^the ground. ‘‘You


THE CASTLE

99
were told to ask by your wife ? ” replied K., you'revery much under her influence ? " ** No," said the
landlord, " I didn't ask because of my wife. But she'svery bothered and unhappy on your account, can'twork, lies in bed and sighs and complains all the time."** Shall I go and see her ? " asked K. "I wish youwould," said the landlord. " I've been to the Super-intendent's ajready to fetch you. I listened at the doorbut you were talking. 7 didn't want to disturb you,besides I was anxious about my wife and ran backagain ; but she wouldn't see me, so there was nothingfor it but to wait for you." " Then let's go at once,"said K., " I'll soon reassure her." " If you could onlymanage it," said the landlord. 

They went through the bright kitchen where threeor four maids, engaged all in different corners at thework they were happening to be doing, visibly stiffenedon seeing K. From the kitchen the sighing of thelandl^y could already be heard. She lay in a window-less annex separated from the kitchen by thin lathboarding. There was room in it only for a huge familybed and a chest. The bed was so placed that from itone could overlook the whole kitchen and superintendthe work. From the kitchen, on the other hand,hardly anything could be seen in the annex. There itwas quite dark : only the faint gleam of the purplebed-coverlet could be distinguished. Not until oneentered and one's eyes became used to the darkness didone detach particular objects. 

" You've come at last," said the landlady feebly. 
She was lying stretched out on her back, she breathedwith visible difficulty, she had thrown back the featherquilt. In bed she looked much younger than in herclothes, but a nightcap of delicate lacework which she


lOO

THE CASTLE

wore, although it was too small and nodded on herhead, made her sunk face look pitiable. Why shouldI have come ? asked K. mildly. ‘‘You didn't sendfor me." ‘‘You shouldn't have kept me waiting solong," said the landlady with the capriciousness of aninvalid. ‘‘ Sit down," she went on, pointing to thebed, ‘‘ and you others go away." Meantime the maidsas well as the assistants had crowded in. /‘ I'll go too,Gardana," said the landlord.*' This was the first timethat K. had heard her name. ‘‘ Of course," shereplied slowly, and as if she were occupied with otherthoughts she added absently : ‘‘ Why should you remainany more than the others ? " But when they had allretreated to the kitchen — even the assistants this timewent at once, besides, a maid was behind them —Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything shesaid could be heard in there, for the annex lacked adoor, and so she commanded everyone to leave thekitchen as well. It was immediately done. 

" Land Surveyor," said Gardana, ‘‘ there's a wraphanging over there beside the chest, will you pleasereach me it ? I'll lay it over me. I can't bear thefeather quilt, my breatliing is so bad." And as K. 
handed her the wrap, she went on : ‘‘ Look, this is abeautiful wrap, isn't it ? " To K. it seemed to be anordinary woollen wrap ; he felt it with his fingersagain merely out of politeness, but did not reply. ‘‘Yes,it's a beautiful wrap," said Gardana covering herselfup. Now she lay back comfortably, all her pain seemedto have gone, she actually had enough strength to thinkof the state of her hair which had been disordered byher lying position ; she raised herself up for a moment *and rearranged her coiffeur a little round the nightcap. 
Her hair was abundant. 



THE CASTLE

lOI

K. became impatient, and began : “ You asked me,madam, whether I had found other lodgings yet/* “ Iask^d you ? *' said the landlady, no, you*re mistaken/*“ Your husband asked me a few minutes ago/* ** Thatmay well be,** said the landlady ; Tm at variance withhim. When I didn*t want you here, he kept you here,now that Tm glad to have you here, he wants to driveyou away. He*s always like that.** Have youchanged your opinion of me so greatly, then ? ** asked K. 
‘‘In a couple of hours?** “I haven*t changed myopinion,** said the landlady more freely again ; ** giveme your hand. There, and now promise to be quitefrank with me and 1*11 be the same with you.** “ Right,**said K., “ but who*s to begin first? ** I shall,** saidthe landlady. She did not give so much the impressionof one who wanted to meet K. half-way, as of one whowas eager to have the first word. 

She drew a photograph from under the pillow andheld it out to K. “ Look at that portrait,** she saideagerly. To see it better K. stepped into the kitchen,but even there it was not easy to distinguish anythingon the photograph, for it was faded with age, cracked inseveral places, crumpled, and dirty. ** It isn*t in verygood condition,** said K. “ Unluckily no,** said thelandlady, “ when one carries a thing about with onefor years it*s bound to be the case. But if you look at itcarefully, you*ll be able to make everything out, you*llsee. But I can help you ; tell me what you see, I liketo hear anyone talk about the portrait. Well, then ? **“ A young man,** said K. “ Right,** said the landlady,“ and what is he doing ? ** “It seems to me he*slying on a board stretching himself and yawning.** Thelandlady laughed. “ Quite wrong,'* she said. Buthere’s the board and here he is lying on it,** persisted K. 



102

THE CASTLE

on his side. But look more carefully," said the land-lady in annoyance, " is he really lying down ? " " No,"said K. now, " he's floating, and now I can see it, it'snot a board at all, but probably a rope, and the youngman is taking a high leap." " You see ! " replied thelandlady triumphantly, " he's leaping, that's how theofficial messengers practise. I knew quite well thatyou would make it out. Can you make out his face,too ? " I can only make out* his face very dimly," saidK., " he's obviously making a great effort, his mouthis open, his eyes tightly shut and his hair fluttering."" Well done," said the landlady appreciatively, " no-body who never saw him could have made out morethan that. But he was a beautiful young man. Ionly saw him once for a second and I'll never forgethim." " Who was he then ? " asked K. " He wasthe messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him thefirst time."
K. could not hear properly, his attention was dis-tracted by the rattling of glass. He immediately dis-covered the cause of the disturbance. The assistantswere standing outside in the yard hopping from onefoot to the other in the snow, behaving as if they wereglad to see him again ; in their joy they pointed eachother out to him and kept tapping all the time on thekitchen window. At a threatening gesture from K. theystopped at once, tried to pull one another away, butthe one would slip immediately from the grasp of theother and soon they were both back at the windowagain. K. hurried into the annex where the assistantscould not see him from outside and he would not haveto see them. But the soft and as it were beseechingtapping on the window-pane followed him there toofor a long time. 



THE CASTLE

103
" The assistants again," he said apologetically to thelandlady and pointed outside. But she paid no atten-tion to him ; she had taken the portrait from him, lookedat it, smoothed it out, and pushed it again under herpillow. Her movements had become slower, but notwith weariness, but with the burden of memory. Shehad wanted to tell K. the story of her life and had for-gotten about him in thinking of the story itself. Shewas playing with the fringe of her wrap. A little timewent by before she looked up, passed her hand overher eyes, and said : " This wrap was given me byKlamm. And the nightcap, too. The portrait, thewrap, and the nightcap, these are the only three thingsof his I have as keepsakes. Tm not young like Frieda,I’m not so ambitious as she is, nor so sensitive either,she’s very sensitive to put it bluntly, I know how toaccommodate myself to life, but one thing I mustadmit, I couldn’t have held out so long here withoutthese three keepsakes. Perhaps these three things seemvery trifling to you, but let me tell you, Frieda, who hashad relations with Klamm for a long time, doesn’tpossess a single keepsake from him. I have askedher, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ;I, on the other hand, though I was only three timeswith Klamm — after that he never asked me to comeagain, I don’t know why — I managed to bring threepresents back with me all the same, having a pre-monition that my time would be short. Of course onemust make a point of it. Klamm gives nothing ofhimself, but if one sees something one likes lying aboutthere, one can get it out of him.”
• K. felt uncomfortable listening to these tales, much asthey interested him. ” How long ago was all that,then ? ” he asked with a sigh. 



THE CASTLE

104
Over twenty years ago," replied the landlady," considerably over twenty years."
" So one remains faithful to Klamm as long as that,"said K. " But are you aware, madam, that thesestories give me grave alarm when I think of my futuremarried life ? "
The landlady seemed to consider this intrusion of hisown affairs unseasonable and gave him an angry sidelook. 

" Don't be angry, madam," said K. ** I've nothingat all to say against Klamm. All the same, by force ofcircumstances I have come in a sense in contact withKlamm ; that can't be gainsaid even by his greatestadmirer. Well, then. As a result of that I am forcedwhenever Klamm is mentioned to think of myself aswell, that can't be altered. Besides, madam," here K. 
took hold of her reluctant hand, " reflect how badly ourlast talk turned out and that this time we want to partin peace."
" You're right," said the landlady, bowing her head," but spare me. I'm not more touchy than otherpeople ; on the contrary, everyone has his sensitive spots,and I have only this one."
" Unfortunately it happens to be mine too," said K.," but I promise to control myself. Now tell me,madam, how I am to put up with my married life inface of this terrible fidelity, granted that Frieda, too,resembles you in that ? "
" Terrible fidelity ! " repeated the landlady with agrowl. "Is it a question of fidelity ? I'm faithful tomy husband — but Klamm 7 Klamm once chose meas his mistress, can I ever lose that honour 7 And youask how you arc to put up with Frieda 7 Oh, Land.. 
Surveyor, who are you after all that you dare to asksuch things 7 "


THE CASTLE

105

" Madam,'* said K. wamingly. 

I know," said the landlady, controlling herself, " butmy husband never put such questions. I don't knowwhich to call the unhappier, myself then or Frieda now. 
Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom hestopped asking to come. Yet it is probably Frieda,though she hasn't even yet guessed the full extent of herunhappiness, it seems. Still, my thoughts were moreexclusively occupied by my unhappiness then, all thesame, for I had always to be asking myself one question,and in reality haven't ceased to ask it to this day : Whydid this happen ? Three times Klamm sent for me, buthe never sent a fourth time, no, never a fourth time !What else could I have thought of during those days ?What else could I have talked about with my husband,whom I married shortly afterwards ? During the daywe had no time — ^we had taken over this inn in a wretchedcondition and had to struggle to make it respectable —but at night ! For years all our nightly talks turned onKlamm and the reason for his changing his mind. Andif my husband fell asleep during those talks I woke himand we went on again."
" Now," said K., "if you'll permit me, I'm going toask a very rude question."
The landlady remained silent. 

" Then I mustn't ask it," said K. " Well, that
serves my purpose as well."
" Yes," replied the landlady, " that serves your pur-pose as well, and just that serves it best. You mis-construe everything, even a person's silence. Youcan't do anything else. I allow you to ask yourquestion."
" If I misconstrue everything, perhaps I misconstruemy question as well, perhaps it's not so rude after all,


THE CASTLE

io6
I only want to know how you came to meet yourhusband and how this inn came into your hands/*
The landlady wrinkled her forehead, but said in-differently : ‘‘ That's a very simple story. My fatherwas the blacksmith, and Hans, my husband, who wasa groom at a big farmer's place, came often to see him. 
That was just after my last meeting with Klamm. Iwas very unhappy and really had no right to be so, foreverything had gone as it should, and tfiat I wasn'tallowed any longer to see Klamm was Klamm's owndecision. It was as it should be then, only the groundsfor it were obscure. I was entitled to enquire into them,but I had no right to be unhappy ; still I was, all thesame, couldn't work, and sat in our front garden all day. 
There Hans saw me, often sat down beside me. Ididn't complain to him, but he knew how things were,and as he was a good young man, he wept with me. 
The wife of the landlord at that time had died and hehad consequently to give up business — besides he wasalready an old man. Well once as he passed our gardenand saw us sitting there, he stopped, and without moreado offered us the inn to rent, didn't ask for any moneyin advance, for he trusted us, and set the rent at a verylow figure. I didn't want to be a burden on my father,nothing else mattered to me, and so thinking of the innand of my new work that might perhaps help me to forgeta little, I gave Hans my hand. That's the whole story."
There was silence for a little, then K. said : " Thebehaviour of the landlord was generous, but rash, or hadhe particular grounds for trusting you both ? "
" He knew Hans well," said the landlady ; " he wasHans's uncle."
" Well then," said K., " Hans's family must have beenvery anxious to be connected with you ? "


THE CASTLE

107
** It may be so," said the landlady, " I don’t know. 
I’ve never bothered about it."
But it must have been so all the same," said K.,
seeing that the family was ready to make such asacrifice and to give the inn into your hands absolutelywithout security."
" It wasn’t imprudent, as was proved later," said thelandlady. " I threw myself into the work, I was strong,I was the blacksmith’s daughter, I didn’t need maidor servant. I was everywhere, in the taproom, in thekitchen, in the stables, in the yard. I cooked so wellthat I even enticed some of the Herrenhof’s customersaway. You’ve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time,you don’t know our day customers ; at that time therewere more of them, many of them have stopped comingsince. And the consequence was that we were ablenot merely to pay the rent regularly, but that after afew years we bought the whole place and to-day it’spractically free of debt. The further consequence, Iadmit, was that I ruined my health, got heart disease,and am now an old woman. Probably you think thatI'm much older than Hans, but the fact is that he’s onlytwo or three years younger than me and will never growany older either, for at his work — smoking his pipe,listening to the customers, knocking out his pipe again,and fetching an occasional pot of beer — at that sort ofwork one doesn’t grow old."
" What you’ve done has been splendid," said K. 
" I don’t doubt that for a moment, but we were speakingof the time before your marriage, and it must have beenan extraordinary thing at that stage for Hans’s family to.press on the marriage — at a money sacrifice, or at leastat such a great risk as the handing over of the inn musthave been — and without trusting in anything but your


THE CASTLE

108
powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, andHans's powers of work, which everybody must haveknown beforehand were nil."
" Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I knowwhat you're getting at and how wide you are of themark. Klamm had absolutely nothing to do with thematter. Why should he have concerned himself aboutme, or better, how could he in any case have concernedhimself about me ? He knew^nothing about me by thattime. The fact that he had ceased to summon me wasa sign that he had forgotten me. When he stopssummoning people, he forgets them completely. Ididn’t want to talk of this before Frieda. And it's notmere forgetting, it's something more than that. Foranybody one has forgotten can come back to one'smemory again, of course. With Klamm that's im-possible. Anybody that he stops summoning he hasforgotten completely, not only as far as the past isconcerned, but literally for the future as well. If I tryvery hard I can of course think myself into your ideas,valid, perhaps, in the very different land you comefrom. But it's next thing to madness to imagine thatKlamm could have given me Hans as a husband simplythat I might have no great difficulty in going to himif he should summon me sometime again. Where isthe man who could hinder me from running to Klammif Klamm lifted his little finger ? Madness, absolutemadness, one begins to feel confused oneself when oneplays with such mad ideas."
No," said K., " I've no intention of getting con-fused ; my thoughts hadn't gone so far as you imagined,though, to tell the truth, they were on that road. For*the moment the only thing that surprises me is thatHans's relations expected so much from his marriage


THE CASTLE

109
and that these expectations were actually fulfilled, atthe sacrifice of your sound heart and your health, it istrue. The idea that these facts were connected withKlamm occurred to me I admit, but not with thebluntness, or not till now with the bluntness that yougive it — apparently with no object but to have a digat me, because that gives you pleasure. Well, makethe most of your pleasure I My idea, however, was this :first of all Ivlamm was obviously the occasion of yourmarriage. If it hadn't been for Klamm you wouldn'thave been unhappy and wouldn't have been sittingdoing nothing in the garden, if it hadn't been for KlammHans wouldn't have seen you sitting there, if it hadn'tbeen that you were unhappy a shy man like Hans wouldnever have ventured to speak, if it hadn't been forKlamm Hans would never have found you in tears, ifit hadn't been for Klamm the good old uncle wouldnever have seen you sitting there together peacefully,if it hadn't been for Klamm you wouldn't have beenindifferent to what life still ofered you, and thereforewould never have married Hans. Now in all thisthere's enough of Klamm already, it seems to me. Butthat's not all. If you hadn't been trying to forget, youcertainly wouldn't have overtaxed your strength somuch and done so splendidly with the inn. So Klammwas there too. But apart from that Klamm is also theroot cause of your illness, for before your marriage yourheart was already worn out with your hopeless passionfor him. The only question that remains now is, whatmade Hans's relatives so eager for the marriage? Youyourself said just now that to be Klamm's mistress is a• distinction that can't be lost, so it may have been thatthat attracted them. But besides that, I imagine, theyhad the hope that the lucky star that led you to Klamm


no

THE CASTLE

— assuming that it was a lucky star, but you maintainthat it was— was your star and so would remain constantto you and not leave you quite so quickly and suddenlyas Klamm did.**
** Do you mean all this in earnest ? ** asked thelandlady. 

Yes, in earnest,** replied K. immediately, ** only Iconsider Hans*s relations were neither entifely right norentirely wrong in their hope^, and I think, too, I cansee the mistake that they made. In appearance, ofcourse, everything seems to have succeeded. Hans iswell provided for, he has a handsome wife, is looked upto, and the inn is free of debt. Yet in reality everythinghas not succeeded, he would certainly have been muchhappier with a simple girl who gave him her first love,and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, asyou complain, and because he really feels as if he werelost — without being unhappy over it, I grant you, Iknow that much about him already — it*s just as truethat a handsome, intelligent young man like him wouldbe happier with another wife, and by happier Imean more independent, industrious, manly. And youyourself certainly can*t be happy, seeing you say youwouldn’t be able to go on without these three keepsakes,and your heart is bad, too. Then were Hans*s relativesmistaken in their hopes ? I don*t think so. The blessingwas over you, but they didn’t know how to bring it down.**Then what did they miss doing ? '* asked the land-lady. She was lying outstretched on her back nowgazing up at the ceiling. 

” To ask Klamm,** said K. 

So we’re back at your case again,** said the landlady. ^Or at yours,** said K. Our affairs run parallel.*'
“What do you want from Klamm?** asked the


THE CASTLE

111

landlady. She had sat up, had shaken out the pillowsso as to lean her back against them, and looked K. fullin* the eyes. Tve told you frankly about my experi-ences, from which you should have been able to learnsomething. Tell me now as frankly what you want toask Klamm. Tve had great trouble in persuadingFrieda to go up to her room and stay there, I wasafraid you wouldn*t talk freely enough in her presence/'I have nothing to hide," said K. " But first of all Iwant to draw your attention to something. Klammforgets immediately, you say. Now in the first placethat seems very improbable to me, and secondly it isundemonstrable, obviously nothing more than legend,thought out moreover by the flapperish minds of thosewho have been in Klamm's favour. Tm surprised thatyou believe in such a banal invention."
" It's no legend," said the landlady, " it's muchrather the result of general experience."
" I see, a thing then to be refuted by further experi-ence," said K. " Besides there's another distinctionstill between your case and Frieda's. In Frieda's caseit didn't happen that Klamm never summoned heragain, on the contrary he summoned her but she didn'tobey. It's even possible that he's still waiting for her."
The landlady remained silent, and only looked K. 
up and down with a considering stare. At last shesaid : " I'll try to listen quietly to what you have tosay. Speak frankly and don't spare my feelings. I'veonly one request. Don't use Klamm's name. Call him‘ him ' or something, but don't mention him by name."
" Willingly," replied K., " but what I want fromhim is difficult to express. Firstly, I want to see himat close quarters ; then I want to hear his voice ; thenI want to get from him what his attitude is to our


112

THE CASTLE

marriage. What I shall ask from him after that dependson the outcome of our interview. Lots of things maycome up in the course of talking, but still the mostimportant thing for me is to be confronted with him. 
You see I haven't yet spoken with a real official. Thatseems to be more difficult to manage than I had thought. 
But now Tm put under the obligation of speaking tohim as a private person, and that, in my opinion, ismuch easier to bring about. •As an official I can onlyspeak to him in his bureau in the Castle, which may beinaccessible, or — and that's questionable, too — in theHerrenhof. But as a private person I can speak tohim anywhere, in a house, in the street, wherever Ihappen to meet him. If I should find the official infront of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well,but that's not my primary object."
" Right," said the landlady pressing her face into thej^illows as if she were uttering something shameful,"if by using my influence I can manage to get yourrequest for an interview passed on to Klamm, promiseme to do nothing on your own account until the replycomes back."
" I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would beto fulfil your wishes or your whims. The matter isurgent, you see, especially after the unfortunate outcomeof my talk with the Superintendent."
" That excuse falls to the ground," said the landlady," tlie Superintendent is a person of no importance. 
Haven't you found that out ? He couldn't remainanother day in his post if it weren't for his wife, whoruns everything."
" Mizzi ? " asked K. The landlady nodded. " Shewas present," said K. ** Did she express her opinion ? "asked the landlady. 



THE CASTLE

(

”3

" No/' replied K., '' but I didn't get the impressionthat she could."
"•There," said the landlady, " you see how dis-torted your view of everything here is. In any case ;the Superintendent's arrangements for you are of noimportance, and I'll talk to his wife when I have time. 
And if I promise now in addition that Klamm's answerwill come in a week at latest, you can't surely have anyfurther grounds for not obKging me."
" All that is not enough to influence me," said K. 
" My decision is made, and I would try to carry it outeven if an unfavourable answer were to come. And.seeing that this is my fixed intention, I can't very welldsk for an interview beforehand. A thing that wouldremain a daring attempt, but still an attempt in goodfaith so long as I didn't ask for an interview, wouldturn into an open transgression of the law after re-ceiving an unfavourable answer. That frankly wouldbe far vl^orse."
" Worse ? " said the landlady. " It's a transgressionof the law in any case. And now you can do what youlike. Reach me over my skirt."
Without paying any regard to K.'s presence she pulledon her skirt and hurried into the kitchen. For a longtime already K. had been hearing noises in the dining-room. There was a tapping on the kitchen-hatch. 
The assistants had unfastened it and were shouting thatthey were hungry. Then other faces appeared at it. 
One could even hear a subdued song being chanted byseveral voices. 

Undeniably K.'s conversation with the landlady•had greatly delayed the cooking of the midday meal,it was not ready yet and the customers had assembled. 
Nevertheless nobody had dared to set foot in the kitchen


THE CASTLE

II4
after the landlady's order. But now when the observersat the hatch reported that the landlady was coming, themaids immediately ran back to the kitchen, and as K. 
entered the dining-room a surprisingly large company,more than twenty, men and women — all attired inprovincial but not rustic clothes — streamed back fromthe hatch to the tables to make sure of their seats. Onlyat one little table in the corner was a married coupleseated already with a few children. The man, a kindly,blue-eyed person with disordered grey hair and beard,stood bent over the children and with a knife beat timeto their singing, which he perpetually strove to soften. 
Perhaps he was trying to make them forget their hungerby singing. The landlady threw a few indifferent wordsof apology to her customers, nobody complained of herconduct. She looked round for the landlord, who hadfled from the difficulty of the situation, however, longago. Then she went slowly into the kitchen ; she didnot take any more notice of K., who hurried to Friedain her room. 


VII
U PSTAIRS K. ran into tlie teacher. The room wasimproved almost beyond recognition so well hadFrieda set to work. It was well aired, the stove amplystoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, themaids’ filthy pile of things and even their photographscleared away ; the table, which had literally struck onein the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,*was covered with a white embroidered cloth. One wasin a position to receive visitors now. K.'s small change


THE CASTLE

of underclothes hanging before the fire — Frieda musthave washed them early in the morning — did not spoilthe impression much. Frieda and the teacher weresitting at the table, they rose at K/s entrance. Friedagreeted K. with a kiss, the teacher bowed slightly. 
Distracted and still agitated by his talk with the land-lady, K. began to apologise for not having been able yetto visit the teacher ; it was as if he were assuming thatthe teacher nad called oft him finally because he wasimpatient at K/s absence. On the other hand, theteacher in his precise way only seemed now graduallyto remember that sometime or other there had beensome mention between K. and himself of a visit. 
‘'You must be. Land Surveyor,"' he said slowly, " thestranger I had a few words with the other day inthe church square." " I am," replied K. shortly ; thebehaviour which he had submitted to when he felthomeless he did not intend to put up with now here inhis room. He turned to Frieda and consulted with herabout an important visit which he had to pay at onceand for which he would need his best clothes. Withoutfurther enquiry Frieda called over the assistants, whowere already busy examining the new tablecloth, andcommanded them to brush K.'s suit and shoes — which hehad begun to take off — down in the yard. She herself tooka shirt from the line and ran down to the kitchen to iron it. 

Now K. was left alone with the teacher, who wasseated silently again at the table ; K. kept him waitingfor a little longer, drew off his shirt and began to washhimself at the tap. Only then, with his back to theteacher, did he ask him the reason for his visit. " I^ have come at the instance of the Parish Superintendent,"he said. K. made ready to listen. But as the noise ofthe water made it difficult to catch what K. said, the


11 6 THE CASTLE
teacher had to come nearer and lean against the wallbeside him. K. excused his washing and his hurry bythe urgency of his coming appointment. The teacherswept aside his excuses, and said : “You were dis-courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old andexperienced man who should be treated with respect.**“ Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** saidK. while he dried himself, “ but that I ha^ other thingsto think of than polite behavfour is true enough, for myexistence is at stake, which is threatened by a scandalousofficial bureaucracy whose particular failings I needn*tmention to you, seeing that you*re an acting memberof it yourself. Has the Parish Superintendent com-plained about me ? ** “ Where*s the man that he wouldneed to complain of ? ** asked the teacher. “ And evenif there was anyone, do you think he would ever do it ?Tve only made out at his dictation a short protocol onyour interview, and that has shown me clearly enoughhow kind the Superintendent was and what youranswers were like.*'
While K. was looking for his comb, which Frieda musthave cleared away somewhere, he said : “ What ? Aprotocol ? Drawn up afterwards in my absence bysomeone who wasn't at the interview at all ? That’snot bad. And why on earth a protocol ? Was it anofficial interview, then ? ** “ No,** replied the teacher,
“ a semi-official one, the protocol too was only semi-official. It was merely drawn up because with useverything must be done in strict order. In any caseit's finished now, and it doesn't better your credit.**K., who had at last found the comb, which had beentucked into the bed, said more calmly : “ Well then, it'sfinished. Have you come to tell me that? ** “ No,**
said the teacher, “ but I'm not a machine and I had to


THE CASTLE

117
give you my opinion. My instructions are only anotherproof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want toemphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom-prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in-structions because it's my duty and out of respect tothe Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. nowsat down at the table to wait for his shirt and clothes ;he was not very curious to know the message that theteacher had brought, he* was influenced besides bythe landlady's low opinion of the Superintendent. " Itmust be after twelve already, surely ? " he said, thinkingof the distance he had to walk ; then he rememberedhimself, and said : "You want to give me some messagefrom the Superintendent." " Well, yes," said theteacher, shrugging his shoulders as if he were discardingall responsibility. " The Superintendent is afraid that,if the decision in your case takes too long, you mightdo something rash on your own account. For myown part I don't know why he should fear that — myown opinion is that you should just be allowed to dowhat you like. We aren't your guardian angels andwe're not obliged to run after you in all your doings. 
Well and good. The Superintendent, however, is ofa different opinion. He can't of course hasten thedecision itself, which is a matter for the authorities. 
But in his own sphere of jurisdiction he wants to providea temporary and truly generous settlement ; it simplylies with you to accept it. He offers you provisionallythe post of school janitor." At first K. thought verylittle of the offer made him, but the fact that an offerhad been made seemed to him not without significance. 
It seemed to point to the fact that in the Superintendent'sopinion he was in a position to look after himself, tocarry out projects against which the Town Council


THE CASTLE

Il8

»

itself was preparing certain counter measures. Andhow seriously they were taking the matter ! Theteacher, who had already been waiting for a while, undwho before that, moreover, had made out the protocol,must of course have been told to run here by the Super-intendent. When the teacher saw that he had madeK. reflect at last, he went on ; ** I put my objections. 
I pointed out that up till now a janitor hadn't beenfound necessary ; the churchwarden's wife cleared upthe place from time to time, and Fraulein Gisa, thesecond teacher, overlooked the matter. I had troubleenough with the children, I didn't want to be botheredby a janitor as well. The Superintendent pointedout that all the same the school was very dirty. Ireplied, keeping to the truth, that it wasn’t so verybad. And, I went on, would it be any better if we tookon this man as janitor ? Most certainly not. Apartfrom the fact that he didn't know the work, there wereonly two big classrooms in the school, and no additionalroom ; so the janitor and his family would have tolive, sleep, perhaps even cook in one of the classrooms,which could hardly make for greater cleanliness. Butthe Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this postwould keep you out of difficulties, and that conse-quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ;he suggested further, that along with you we wouldobtain the services of your wife and your assistants, sothat the school should be kept in first-rate order, andnot only it, but the school-garden as well. I easilyproved that this would not hold water. At last theSuperintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu-ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said thatyou were a Land Surveyor after all and so should beable to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. Well,


THE CASTLE

1

119

against a joke there’s no argument, and so I came toyou with the proposal/’ You’ve taken your troublefor .nothing, teacher,” said K. ” I have no intentionof accepting the post/' ” Splendid ! ” said the teacher. 
“ Splendid I You decline quite unconditionally,” andhe took his hat, bowed, and went. 

Immediately afterwards Frieda came rushing up thestairs with an excited face, the shirt still unironed in herhand ; she diH not reply to K.’s enquiries. To distracther he told her about the teacher and the offer ; shehad hardly heard it when she flung the shirt on thebed and ran out again. She soon came back, but withthe teacher, who looked annoyed and entered withoutany greeting. Frieda begged him to have a littlepatience — obviously she had done that already severaltimes on the way up — then drew K. through a sidedoor of which he had never suspected the existence, onto the neighbouring loft, and then at last, out of breathwith excitement, told what had happened to her. 
Enraged that Frieda had humbled herself by making anavowal to K., and — ^what was still worse — had yieldedto him merely to secure him an interview with Klamm,and after all had gained nothing but, so she alleged, coldand moreover insincere professions, the landlady wasresolved to keep K. no longer in her house ; if he hadconnections with the Castle, then he should takeadvantage of them at once, for he must leave the housethat very day, that very minute, and she would onlytake him back again at the express order and commandof the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come tothat, for she too had connections with the Castle and•would know how to make use of them. Besides he wasonly in the inn because of the landlord’s negligence,and moreover he was not in a state of destitution, for


120

THE CASTLE

this very morning he had boasted of a roof which wasalways free to him for the night. Frieda of coursewas to remain ; if Frieda wanted to go with K. she^ thelandlady, would be very sorry ; down in the kitchenshe had sunk into a chair by the fire and cried at themere thought of it. The poor, sick woman ; but howcould she behave otherwise, now that, in her imagina-tion at any rate, it was a matter involving the honourof Klamm's keepsakes ? That was how ‘matters stoodwith the landlady. Frieda of course would follow him,K., wherever he wanted to go. Yet the position ofboth of them was very bad in any case, just for thatreason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ;even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was — thatwas expressly insisted on — only a temporary post ,* onewould gain a little time and would easily find otherchances, even if the final decision should turn out to beunfavourable. If it comes to the worst," cried Friedaat last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what istliere in the village to keep us ? But for the time being,darling, we'll accept the offer, won’t we ? I've fetchedthe teacher back again, you've only to say to him* Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school."
" It's a great nuisance," said K. without quitemeaning it, for he was not much concerned about hislodgings, and in his underclothes he was shivering uphere in the loft, which without wall or window on twosides was swept by a cold draught, " you've arrangedthe room so comfortably and now we must leave it. 

I would take up the post very, very unwillingly ; thefew snubs I've already had from the teacher have beenpainful enough, and now he's to become my superior,^no less. If we could only stay here a little while longer,perhaps my position might change for the better this


THE CASTLE

121

i
very afternoon. If you would only remain here atleast, we could wait on for a little and give the teachera nen-committal answer. As for me, if it came to theworst, I could really always find a lodging for the
night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting
her hand over his mouth. “ No, not that,'* she saidbeseechingly, “ please never mention that again. Ineverything else Til obey you. If you like Til stay onhere by myself, sad as it will be for me. If you like,we'll refuse the offer, wrong as that would seem to me. 
For look here, if you find another possibility, even thisafternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw upthe post in the school at once ; nobody would object. 
And as for your humiliation in front of the teacher, letme see to it that there will be none ; I'll speak to himmyself, you'll only have to be there and needn't sayanything, and later, too, it will be just the same, you'llnever be made to speak to him if you don't want to,I— I alone — ^will be his subordinate in reality, and Iwon't be even that, for I know his weak points. Soyou see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, anda great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don'twring something out of the Castle this very day, you'llnever manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere atall in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, thatis, of which I needn’t be ashamed as your future wife. 
And if you don't manage to find a roof for the night,do you really expect me to sleep here in my warmroom, while I know that you are wandering about outthere in the dark and cold ? " K., who had been tryingto warm himself all this time by clapping his chest with• his arms like a carter, said : Then there's nothing
left but to accept ; come along ! ”
When they returned to the room he went straight


122

THE CASTLE

over to the fire ; he paid no attention to the teacher ;the latter, sitting at the table, drew out his watch andsaid : It*s getting late/' " I know, but we're com-pletely agreed at last," said Frieda, " we accept thepost/' " Good," said the teacher, " but the post isoffered to the Land Surveyor ,* he must say the wordhimself." Frieda came to K.'s help. " Really," shesaid, " he accepts the post. Don't you, K. ? " So K. 
could confine his declaration ^o a simple ^ Yes," whichwas not even directed to the teacher but to Frieda. 
" Then," said the teacher, " the only thing that remainsfor me is to acquaint you with your duties, so that inthat respect we can understand each other once and forall. You have. Land Surveyor, to clean and heat bothclassrooms daily, to make any small repairs in thehouse, further, to look after the class and gymnasticapparatus personally, to keep the garden path free ofsnow, run messages for me and the lady teacher, andlook after all the work in the garden in the warmerseasons of the year. In return for that you have the rightto live in whichever one of the classrooms you like ; but,when both rooms are not being used at the same timefor teaching, and you are in the room that is needed,you must of course move to the other room. Youmustn't do any cooking in the school ; in return youand your dependants will be given your meals here inthe inn at the cost of the Town Council. That youmust behave in a manner consonant with the dignityof the school, and in particular that the children dur-ing school hours must never be allowed to witnessany unedifying matrimonial scenes, I mention only inpassing, for as an educated man you must of courseknow that. In connection with that I want to sayfurther that we must insist on your relations with


THE CASTLE

Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possiblemoment. About all this and a few other triflingmatt?ers, an agreement will be made out, which as soonas you move over to the school must be signed by you."To K. all this seemed of no importance, as if it did notconcern him or at any rate did not bind him ; but theself-importance of the teacher irritated him, and hesaid carelessly : "I know, they're the usual duties."To wipe away the impression created by this remarkFrieda enquired about the salary. " Whether there willbe any salary," said the teacher, " will only be consideredafter a month's trial service." " But that is hard onus," said Frieda. " We'll have to marry on practicallynothing, and have nothing to set up house on. Couldn'tyou make a representation to the Town Council, sir, togive us a small salary at the start ? Couldn^t you advisethat? " " No," replied the teacher, who continued to
direct his words to K. " Representations to the TownCouncil will only be made if I give the word, and Ishan't give it. The post has only been given to youas a personal favour, and one can't stretch a favour toofar, if one has any consciousness of one's obvious re-sponsibilities." Now K. intervened at last, almostagainst his will. " As for the favour, teacher," he said," it seems to me that you're mistaken. The favour isperhaps rather on my side." " No," replied theteacher, smiling now that he had compelled K. tospeak at last. " Tm completely grounded on thatpoint. Our need for a janitor is just about as urgentas our need for a Land Surveyor. Janitor, Land Sur-veyor, in both cases it's a burden on our shoulders,ril still have a lot of trouble thinking out how I'm tojustify the post to the Town Council. The best thingand the most honest thing would be to throw the pro-


THE CASTLE

124

0

posal on the table and not justify anything/* ** That’sjust what I meant/' replied K., “ you must take meon against your will. Although it causes you graveperturbation, you must take me on. But when one iscompelled to take someone else on, and this someoneelse allows himself to be taken on, then he is the

one who grants the favour." " Strange ! " said theteacher. " What is it that compels us to take you on?The only thing that compels us is the Superintendent’skind heart, his too kind heart. I see, Land Surveyor,that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions,before you can become a serviceable janitor. Andremarks such as these hardly produce the right atmo-sphere for the granting of an eventual salary. I notice,too, with regret that your attitude will give me a greatdeal of trouble yet ; all this time — I've seen it with myown eyes and yet can scarcely believe it — ^you've beentalking to me in your shirt and drawers." " Quiteso," exclaimed K. with a laugh, and he clapped hishands. " These terrible assistants, where have theybeen all this time ? " Frieda hurried to the door ; the

teacher, who noticed that K. was no longer to be drawninto conversation, asked her when she would move

into the school, " To-day," said Frieda. " Then to-morrow ril come to inspect matters," said the teacher,waved a good-bye and made to go out through thedoor, vA’hich Frieda had opened for herself, but ran intothe maids, who already were arriving with their thingsto take possession of the room again ; and he, who madeway for nobody, had to slip between them ; Friedafollowed him. " You're surely in a hurry," said K.,who this time w'as very pleased with the maids ; " hadyou to push your way in while we're still here ? " Theydid not answer, only twisted their bundles in embarrass-


THE CASTLE

merit, from which K. saw the well-known filthy ragsprojecting. " So youVe never washed your thingsyet,'^ said K. It was not said maliciously, but actuallywith a certain indulgence. They noticed it, openedtheir hard mouths in concert, showed their beautiful

animal-like teeth and laughed noiselessly. ** Comealong," said K., " put your things down, it's your roomafter all." As they still hesitated, however — the roommust have seemed to them 'fill too well transformed — K. 


took one of them by the arm to lead her forward. Buthe let her go at once, so astonished was the gaze ofboth, which, after a brief glance between them, wasnow turned unflinchingly on K. " But now you'vestared at me long enough," he said, repelling a vague,unpleasant sensation, and he took up his clothes andboots, which Frieda, timidly followed by the assistants,had just brought, and drew them on. The patiencewhich Frieda had with the assistants, always incom-prehensible to him, now struck him again. After along search she had found them below peacefully eatingtheir lunch, the untouched clothes which they shouldhave been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ;then she had had to brush everything herself, and yetshe, who knew how to keep the common people in theirplaces, had not even scolded them, and instead spokein their presence of their grave negligence as if it werea trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of themlightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. Presently K. 
would have to talk to her about this. But now it was

high time to be gone. " The assistants will stay here tohelp you with the removing," he said. They were not■in the least pleased with this arrangement ; happy andfull, they would have been glad of a little exercise. 
Only when Frieda said, " Certainly, you stay here,"


THE CASTLE

126

C

did they yield. Do you know where I'm going V‘asked K. ** Yes/' replied Frieda. " And you don'twant to hold me back any longer ? " asked K. " You'll ^find obstacles enough," she replied, " what does any. 
thing I say matter in comparison ! " She kissed K. 
good-bye, and as he had had nothing at lunch-time, gavehim a little packet of bread and sausage which she hadbrought for him from downstairs, reminded him that hemust not return here again bat to the school, and accom-panied him, with her hand on his shoulder, to the door. 


VIII
A t first K. was glad to have escaped from thecrush of the maids and the assistants in the warmroom. It was freezing a little, the snow was firmer,the going easier. But already darkness was actuallybeginning to fall, and he hastened his steps. 

The Castle, whose contours were already beginningto dissolve, lay silent as ever ; never yet had K. seenthere the slightest sign of life — perhaps it was quiteimpossible to recognise anything at that distance, andyet the eye demanded it and could not endure thatstillness. When K. looked at the Castle, often it seemedto him as if he were observing someone who sat quietlythere in front of him gazing, not lost in thought and sooblivious of everything, but free and untroubled, as ifhe were alone with nobody to observe him, and yetmust notice that he was observed, and all the sameremained with his calm not even slightly disturbed fand really — one did not know whether it was cause oreilect — tile gaze of the observer could not remain con-


THE CASTLE

127
centrated there, but slid away. This impression to-daywas strengthened still further by the early dusk ; thelonger he looked, the less he could make out and thedeeper everything was lost in the twilight. 

Just as K. reached the Herrenhof, which was stillunlighted, a window was opened in the first storey, anda stout, smooth-shaven young man in a fur coat leanedout and then remained at the window. He did notseem to make the slightest response to K.'s greeting. 
Neither in the hall nor in the taproom did K. meet any-body ; the smell of stale beer was still worse than lasttime ; such a state of things was never allowed even inthe inn by the bridge. K. went straight over to thedoor through which he had observed Klamm, andlifted the latch cautiously, but the door was barred ;then he felt for the place where the peephole was,but the pin apparently was fitted so well that he couldnot find the place, so he struck a match. He wasstartled by a cry* In the corner between the door andthe till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching andstaring at him in the flare of the match, with partiallyopened sleep-drunken eyes. She was evidently Frieda'ssuccessor. She soon collected herself and switched onthe electric light ; her expression was cross, then sherecognised K. Ah, the Land Surveyor," she saidsmiling, held out her hand and introduced herself. " Myname is Pepi." She was small, red-cheeked, plump ;her opulent reddish golden hair was twisted into astrong plait, yet some of it escaped and curled roundher temples ; she was wearing a dress of grey shimmeringmaterial, falling in straight lines, which did not suit herin the least ; at the foot it was drawn together by achildishly clumsy silken band with tassels falling fromit, which impeded her movements. She enquired after


THE CASTLE

128
Frieda and asked whether she would come back soon. 
It was a question which verged on insolence, " Assoon as Frieda went away," she said next, " I was called ■here urgently because they couldn't find anybody suit-able at the moment ; I've been a chambermaid tillnow, but this isn't a change for the better. There'slots of evening and night work in this job, it's verytiring, I don't think I'll be able to stand it. I'm notsurprised that Frieda threw it up." " Frieda was veryhappy here," said K., to make her aware definitely of thedifference between Frieda and herself, which she did notseem to appreciate. " Don't you believe her," saidPepi, ** Frieda can keep a straight face better thanotlicr people can. She doesn't admit what she doesn'twant to admit, and so nobody noticed that she hadanything to admit. I've been in service here with herseveral years already. We've slept together all thattime in the same bed, yet I'm not intimate with her, andby now I’m quite out of her thoughts, that's certain. 
Perhaps her only friend is the old landlady of theBridge Inn, and that tells a story too." " Frieda is myfiancee," said K., searching at the same time for thepccpliole in the door. " 1 know," said Pepi, " that'sjust the reason why I've told you. Otherwise itwouldn't have any interest for you."
" 1 understand," said K. "You mean that I shouldbe proud to have won such a reticent girl ? " " That's
so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she hadestablished a secret understanding with K. regardingFrieda. 

But it was not her actual words that troubled K. 
and deflected him for a little from his search, but-raihcr her appearance and her presence in this place. 
Certainly she was much younger than Frieda, almost


THE CASTLE I29
a child still, and her clothes were ludicrous ; she hadobviously dressed in accordance with the exaggerated, notions which she had of the importance of a barmaid'sposition. And these notions were right enough in theirway in her, for this position of which she was still in-capable had come to her unearned and unexpectedly,and only for the time being ; not even the leatherreticule which Frieda always wore on her belt had beenentrusted to her. And her ostensible dissatisfactionu ith the position was nothing but showing off. And\'ct, in spite of her childish mind, she too, apparently,had connections with the Castle ; if she was not lying,i>he had been a chambermaid ; without being awareof what she possessed she slept through the days here,and though if he took this tiny, plump, slightly round-backed creature in his arms he could not extort from her^\’hat she possessed, yet that could bring him in contactwith it and inspirit him for his difficult task. Thencould her case now be much the same as Frieda's ? Oh,no, it was different. One had only to think of Frieda'slook to know that. K. would never have touched Pepi. 

^ All the same he had to lower his eyes for a little now, sogreedily was he staring at her. 

It's against orders for the light to be on," saidPepi, switching it off again. " I only turned it onbecause you gave me such a fright. What do youwant here really ? Did Frieda forget anything ? "" Yes," said K., pointing to the door, " a table-cover, awhite embroidered table-cover, here in the next room."“Yes, her table-cover," said Pepi. " I remember it,a pretty piece of work. I helped with it myself, but•it can hardly be in that room." " Frieda thinks it is. 
Who lives in it, then ? " asked K. " Nobody," saidPepi, " it's the gentlemen's room ; the gentlemen eat5


THE CASTLE

and drink there ; that is, it's reserved for that, but mostof them remain upstairs in their rooms/' If I knew,”said K,, “ that nobody was in there just now, I Wouldlike very much to go in and have a look for the table-cover. But one can't be certain ; Klamm, for instance,is often in the habit of sitting there." " Klamm iscertainly not there now," said Pepi. " He's makingready to leave this minute, the sledge is waiting for himin the yard."
Without a word of explanation K. left the taproomat once ; when he reached the hall lie returned, instead ^of to the door, to the interior of the house, and in a fewsteps reached the courtyard. How still and lovely "itwas here I A four-square yard, bordered on three sidesby the house buildings, and towards the street — a side-street which K. did not know — by a high white wallwith a huge, heavy gate, open now. Here where thecourt was, the house seemed stiller than at tlie front ;at any rate the whole first storey jutted out and had amore impressive appearance, for it was encircled by awooden gallery closed in except for one tiny slit forlooking through. At the opposite side from K. and onthe ground floor, but in the corner where the oppositewing of the house joined the main building, there wasan entrance to the house, open, and without a door. 
Before it was standing a dark, closed sledge to which apair of horses was yoked. Except for the coachman,whom at that distance and in the falling twilight K. 
guessed at rather than recognised, nobody was to be seen. 

Looking about him cautiously, his hands in hispockets, K. slowly coasted round two sides of the yarduntil he reached the sledge. The coachman — one ofthe peasants who had been the other night in the tap-room — smart in his fur coat, watched K. approaching


THE CASTLE

131
non-committally, much as one follows the movementsof a cat. Even when K. was standing beside him andhad ^greeted him, and the horses were becoming a littlerestive at seeing a man looming out of the dusk, heremained completely detached. That exactly suitedK/s purpose. Leaning against the wall of the househe took out his lunch, thought gratefully of Frieda andher solicitous provision for him, and meanwhile peeredinto the house. A very 'Singular and broken stair leddownwards and was crossed down below by a low butapparently deep passage ; everything was clean andwhitewashed, sharply and distinctly defined. 

The wait lasted longer than K. had expected. Longago he had finished his meal, he was getting chilled, thetwilight had changed into complete darkness, and stillKlanim had not arrived. ** It might be a long timeyet/' said a rough voice suddenly, so near to him thatK. started. It was the coachman, who, as if wakeningup, stretched himself and yawned loudly. ** Whatmight be a long time yet ? " asked K., not ungrateful atbeing disturbed, for the perpetual silence and tensionhad already become a burden. Before you go away,''said the coachman. K. did not understand him, but didnot ask further ; he thought that would be the bestmeans of making the insolent fellow speak. Not toanswer here in this darkness was almost a challenge. 
And actually the coachman asked, after a pause :“Would you like some brandy?" "Yes," said K. 
witfiout thinking, tempted only too keenly by theoffer, for he was freezing. " Then open the door ofthe sledge," said the coachman ; "in the side pocket•there are some flasks, take one and have a drink andthen hand it up to me. With this fur coat it's diflScultfor me to get down." K. was annoyed at being ordered


about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach-man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being ‘Sur-prised by Klamm in the sledge. He opened the •ividedoor and could without more ado have drawn a flaskout of the side pocket which was fastened to the inside ofthe door ; but now that it was open he felt an impulsewhich he could not withstand to go inside the sledge ;all he wanted was to sit there for a minute. He slippedinside. The warmth within the sledge was extra-ordinary, and it remained although the door, which K. 
did not dare to close, was wide open. One could nottell whether it was a seat one was sitting on, so com-pletely was one surrounded by blankets, cushions, andfurs ; one could turn and stretch on every side, andalways one sank into softness and warmth. Hisarms spread out, his head supported on pillows whichalways seemed to be there, K. gazed out of the sledgeinto the dark house. Why was Klamm such a longtime in coming ? As if stupefied by the warmth afterhis long wait in the snow, K. began to wish that Klammwould come soon. The thought that he would muchrather not be seen by Klamm in his present positiontouched him only vaguely as a faint disturbance of hiscomfort. He was supported in this obliviousness bythe behaviour of the coachman, who certainly knewthat he was in the sledge and yet let him stay therewithout once demanding the brandy. That was veryconsiderate, but still K. wanted to oblige him. Slowly,without altering his position, he reached out his handto the side-pocket. But not the one in the open door,but the one behind him in the closed door ; after all,it didn’t matter, there were flasks in that one too. Hepulled one out, unscrewed the stopper, and smelt ;involuntarily he smiled, the perfume was so sweet, so


THE CASTLE

133
caressing, like praise and good words from someonewham one likes very much, yet one does not knowcleally what they are for and has no desire to know, andis simply happy in the knowledge that it is one's friendwho is saying them. Can this be brandy ? " K. askedhimself doubtfully and took a taste out of curiosity. 
Yes, strangely enough it was brandy, and burned andwarmed him. How wonderfully it was transformed indrinking out ‘of something which seemed hardly morethan a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman !
Can it be ? " K. asked himself as if self-reproachfully,and took another sip. 

Then — as K. was just in the middle of a long swig- everything became bright, the electric lights blazedinside on the stairs, in the passages, in the entrancehall, outside above the door. Steps could be heardcoming down the stairs, the flask fell from K.'s hand,the brandy was spilt over a rug, K. sprang out of thesledge, he had just time to slam the door to, which madea loud noise, when a gentleman came slowly out of thehouse. The only consolation that remained was thatit w as not Klamm, or was not that rather a pity ? Itwas the gentleman whom K. had already seen at thewindow on the first floor. A young man, very good-looking, pink and white, but very serious. K., too,looked at him gravely, but his gravity was on his ownaccount. Really he would have done better to havesent his assistants here, they couldn't have behavedmore foolishly than he had done. The gentleman stillregarded him in silence, as if he had not enough breathin his overcharged bosom for what has to be said. 

► ' This is unheard of," he said at last, pushing his hata little back on his forehead. What next ? The gentle-man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the


THE CASTLE

IJ4
sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of}Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* thecourtyard ? How do you come to be here ? ' J thegentleman asked next, more softly now, breathingfreely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. Whatquestions to ask 1 And what could one answer ? Was K. 
to admit simply and flatly to this man that his attempt,begun with so many hopes, had failed ? Instead ofreplying, K. turned to the sledge, opened the door andretrieved his cap, which he had forgotten there. Henoticed with discomfort that the brandy was drippingfrom the footboard. 

Then he turned again to the gentleman, to show himthat he had been in the sledge gave him no more com-punction now, besides that wasn't the worst of it ; whenhe was questioned, but only then, he would divulge thefact that the coachman himself had at least asked himto open the door of the sledge. But the real calamitywas that the gentleman had surprised him, that therehad not been enough time left to hide from him so asafterwards to wait in peace for Klamm, or rather thathe had not had enough presence of mind to remainin the sledge, close the door and wait there among therugs for Klamm, or at least to stay there as long as thisman was about. True, he couldn't know of coursewhether it might not be Klamm himself who wascoming, in which case it would naturally have beenmuch better to accost him outside the sledge. Yes,there had been many things here for thought, but nowthere was none, for this was the end. 

“ Come w’ith me," said the gentleman, not reallyas a command, for the command lay not in the words, ,but in a slight, studiedly indifferent gesture of the handwhich accompanied them. " I'm waiting here for




THE CASTLE

135
somebody/* said K., no longer in the hope of any success,but limply on principle. “ Come," said the gentlemanonce* more quite imperturbably, as if he wanted toshow that he had never doubted that K. was waitingfor somebody. " But then I would miss the personTm waiting for,** said K. with an emphatic nod of hishead. In spite of everything that had happened hehad the feeling that what he had achieved thus far wassomething gaiifed, which it»was true he only held nowin seeming, but which he must not relinquish all thesame merely on account of a polite command. " You'llmiss him in any case, whether you go or stay,** said thegentleman, expressing himself bluntly, but showing anunexpected consideration for K.'s line of thought. 
“ Then I would rather wait for him and miss him,"said K. defiantly ; he would certainly not be drivenaway from here by the mere talk of this young man. 
Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super-cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyesfor a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'ssenseless stupidity to his own sound reason again,ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly partedlips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the
horses."
Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side-glance at K., the coachman had now to get down inspite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly — asif he did not so much expect a counter-order from thegentleman as a sensible remark from K. — to back thehorses and the sledge closer to the side wing, in whichapparently, behind a big door, was the shed where thevehicles were kept, K, saw himself deserted, the sledgewas disappearing in one direction, in the other, by the''ay he had come himself, the gentleman was receding. 



Ij6 THE CASTLE
both it was true very slowly, as if they wanted to showK. that it was still in his power to call them back, fPerhaps he had this power, but it would have availedhim nothing ; to call the sledge back would be to drivehimself away. So he remained standing as one who heldthe field, but it was a victory which gave him no joy. 
Alternately he looked at the backs of the gentleman andthe coachman. The gentleman had already reachedthe door through which K. had first tome into thecourtyard ; yet once more he looked back, K. fanciedhe saw him shaking his head over such obstinacy, thenwith a short, decisive, final movement he turned awayand stepped into the hall, where he immediatelyvanished. The coachman remained for a while still inthe courtyard, he had a great deal of work with thesledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed,back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, leadthem to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, withconcentration, evidently without any hope of startingsoon again, and this silent absorption which did notspare a single side-glance for K. seemed to the lattera far heavier reproach than the behaviour of the gentle-man. And when now, after finishing his work in theshed, the coachman went across the courtyard in hisslow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and thenreturned, all very slowly, while he literally looked atnothing but his own footprints in the snow — and finallyshut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electriclights went out too — for whom should they remain on ?— and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery stillremained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for alittle, it seemed to K. as if at last those people hadbroken off all relations with him, and as if now inreality he were freer than he had ever been, and at


THE CASTLE

137
liberty to wait here in this place usually forbidden tohint as long as he desired, and had won a freedom suchas hardly anybody else had ever succeeded in winning,and as if nobody could dare to touch him or drivehim away, or even speak to him ; but — this convictionwas at least equally strong — as if at the same timethere was nothing more senseless, nothing more hope-less, than this freedom, this waiting, this inviolability. 


IX
A nd he tore himself free and went back into thehouse — this time not along the wall but straightthrough the snow — and met the landlord in the hall,who greeted him in silence and pointed towards thedoor of the taproom. K. followed the hint, for he wasshivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he wasgreatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at alittle table — which must have been specially set out, forusually the customers put up with upturned barrels —the young gentleman, and standing before him — anunwelcome sight for K. — the landlady from the BridgeInn. Pepi, proud, her head thrown back and a fixedsmile on her face, conscious of her incontestable dignity,her plait nodding with every movement, hurried toand fro, fetching beer and then pen and ink, for thegentleman had already spread out papers in front ofhim, was comparing dates which he looked up now inthis paper, then again in a paper at the other end ofthe table, and was preparing to write. From her fullheight the landlady silently overlooked the gentlemanand the papers, her lips pursed a little as if musing ; it


THE CASTLE

138
was as if she had already said everything necessary andit had been well received. The Land Snrveyorf atlast/' said the gentleman at K/s entrance, looRingup briefly, then burying himself again in his papers. 
The landlady, too, only gave K. an indiflFerent and notin the least surprised glance. But Pepi actually seemedto notice K. for the first time when he went up to thebar and ordered a brandy. 

K. leaned there, his hands pressed to his eyes, obliviousof everything. Then he took a sip of the brandy andpushed it back, saying it was undrinkable. " All thegentlemen drink it," replied Pepi curtly, poured outthe remainder, washed the glass and set it on the rack. 
" The gentlemen have better stuff as well," said K. 
" It's possible," replied Pepi, " but I haven't," and withthat she was finished with K. and once more at thegentleman's service, who, however, was in need ofnothing, and behind whom she only kept walking to andfro in circles, making respectful attempts to catch aglimpse of the papers over his shoulder ; but that wasonly her senseless curiosity and self-importance, whichthe landlady, too, reprehended with knitted brows. 

Then suddenly the landlady's attention was distracted,she stared, listening intently, into vacancy. K. turnedround, he could not hear anything in particular, nordid the others seem to hear anything ; but the land-lady ran on tip-toe and taking large steps to the doorwhich led to the courtyard, peered through the key-hole, turned then to the others with wide, staring eyesand flushed cheeks, signed to them with her finger tocome near, and now they peered through the keyholeby turns ; the landlady had, of course, the lion's share,but Pepi, too, was considered ; the gentleman was onthe whole the most indifferent of the three. Pepi and


THE CASTLE

^9
the gentleman came away soon, but the landlady kepton peering anxiously, bent double, almost kneeling ;one iiad almost the feeling that she was only imploringthe keyhole now to let her through, for there hadcertainly been nothing more to see for a long time. 
When at last she got up, passed her hand over her face,arranged her hair, took a deep breath, and now at lastseemed to be trying with reluctance to accustom hereyes again to Ithe room and the people in it, K. said,not so much to get his suspicions confirmed, as to fore-stall the announcement, so open to attack did he feelnow : ** Has Klamm gone already then ? The land-lady walked past him in silence, but the gentlemananswered from his table : “ Yes, of course. As soonas you gave up your sentry go, Klamm was able to leave. 
But it*s strange how sensitive he is. Did you notice,landlady, how uneasily Klamm looked round him ? ''The landlady did not appear to have noticed it, but thegentleman went on : Well, fortunately there was
nothing more to be seen, the coachman had effaced eventhe footprints in the snow/' The landlady didn'tnotice anything," said K., but he said it without con-viction, merely provoked by the gentleman's assertion,which was uttered in such a final and unanswerabletone. " Perhaps I wasn't at the keyhole just then,"said the landlady presently, to back up the gentleman,hut then she felt compelled to give Klamm his due aswell, and added : " All the same, I can't believe inthis terrible sensitiveness of Klamm. We are anxiousabout him and try to guard him, and so go on to inferthat he's terribly sensitive. That's as it should be anddt's certainly Klamm's will. But how it is in realitywe don't Imow. Certainly, Klamm will never speakto anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter


THE CASTLE

140
how much trouble this anybody may take, and nomatter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I thatfact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, neverallow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself :why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endureseeing this anybody ? At any rate, it can't be proved,seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle-man nodded eagerly. " That is essentially my opiniontoo, of course," he said, " if I expressed myself a littledifferently, it was to make myself comprehensible tothe Land Surveyor. All the same it's a fact that whenKlamm stepped out of the doorway he looked roundhim several times." " Perhaps he was looking for me,"said K. " Possibly," said the gentleman. " I hadn'tthought of that." They all laughed, Pepi, who hardlyunderstood anything that was being said, loudest of all. 

" Seeing we’re all so happy here now," the gentlemanwent on, "I want to beg you very seriously. LandSurveyor, to enable me to complete my papers byanswering a few questions." " There's a great deal ofwriting there," said K. glancing at the papers fromwhere he was standing. " Yes, a wretched bore," said thegentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't knowyet who I am. I'm Momus, Klamm’s village secretary."At these words seriousness descended on the room ;although the landlady and Pepi knew quite well whothe gentleman was, yet they seemed staggered by theutterance of his name and rank. And even the gentle-man himself, as if he had said more than liis judgmentsanctioned, and as if he were resolved to escape atleast from any after-effects of the solemn import implicitin his own words, buried himself in his papers and^began to write, so that nothing was heard in the roombut the saatching of his pen. " What is that : village


THE CASTLE I4I
secretary ? " asked K. after a pause. The landladyanswered for Momus, who now that he had introducedhimself did not regard it seemly to give such explana-tions himself ; Herr Momus is Klamm's secretaryin the same sense as any of Klamm^s secretaries, but hisofficial province, and if Tm not mistaken, his officialstanding ” — still writing Momus shook his head decidedlyand the lanffiady amended her phrase — well then,his official province, but* not his official standing, isconfined to the village. Herr Momus despatches anyclerical work of Klamm*s which may become necessaryin the village and as Klamm's deputy receives anypetitions to Klamm which may be sent by the village/'As, still quite unimpressed by these facts, K. looked atthe landlady with vacant eyes, she added in a half-embarrassed tone : That's how it's arranged ; all thegentlemen in the Castle have their village secretaries. "Momus, who had been listening far more attentively thanK., supplied the landlady with a supplementary fact :
Most of the village secretaries work only for one gentle-man, but I work for two, for Klamm and for Valla-bene." Yes," went on the landlady, rememberingnow on her side too, and turning to K., " Herr Momusworks for two gentlemen, for Klamm and for Vallabene,and so is twice a village secretary." " Actually twice,"said K., nodding to Momus — who now, leaning slightlyforward, looked him full in the face — as one nods to achild whom one has just heard being praised. If therewas a certain contempt in the gesture, then it was eitherunobserved or else actually expected. Precisely to K.,it seemed, who was not considered worthy even to beseen in passing by Klamm, these people had describedin detail the services of a man out of Klamm's circleN\ith the unconcealed intention of evoking K.'s recog-


THE CASTLE

142
nition and admiration. And yet K. had no prcjperappreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers stroveto get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, forexample, the post of a Momus who was permitted tolive in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ-ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, butrather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attainto Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest withhim, but to go on beyond him, ‘farther yet, into the Castle. 

And he looked at his watch and said : But now
I must be going home." Immediately the positionchanged in Momus's favour. "Yes, of course," thelatter replied, " the school work calls. But you mustfavour me with just a moment of your time. Only afew short questions." " I don’t feel in the mood for it,"said K. and turned towards the door. Momus broughtdown a document on the table and stood up ; " In thename of Klamm I command you to answer myquestions." " In the name of Klamm I " repeated K.," does he trouble himself about my affairs, then ? "" As to that," replied Momus, " I have no informationand you certainly have still less ; we can safely leavethat to him. All the same I command you by virtueof my function granted by Klamm to stay here and toanswer," " Land Surveyor," broke in the landlady. 
" I refuse to advise you any further, my advice till now,the most well-meaning that you could have got, hasbeen cast back at me in the most unheard-of manner ;and I have come here to Herr Momus — I have nothingto hide — simply to give the office an adequate idea ofyour behaviour and your intentions and to protectmyself for all time from having you quartered on meagain ; that’s how we stand towards each other andthat’s how we’ll always stand, and if I speak my mind


THE CASTLE

143
aclordingly now, I don't do it, I can tell you, to helpyou, but to ease a little the hard job which Herr Momusis bound to have in dealing with a man like you. Allthe same, just because of my absolute frankness — andI couldn't deal otherwise than frankly with you evenif I were to try — you can extract some advantage foryourself out of what I say, if you only take the trouble. 
In the present case I want to draw your attention tothis, that the only road tiiat can lead you to Klamm isthrough this protocol here of Herr Momus. But I don'twant to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get youas far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before itreaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decidethat. But in any case that's the only road that willtake you in the direction of Klamm. And do youintend to reject that road, for nothing but pride ? "“ Oh, madam," said K., " that's neither the only roadto Klamm, nor is it any better than the others. But you,Mr. Secretary, decide this question, whether what Imay say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Ofcourse it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudlyand gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I besecretary here ? " "Now you see, madam," said K.," I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. 
Secretary." " I wanted to throw open this road foryou," said the landlady, " didn't I offer this morning tosend your request to Klamm ? That might have beendone through Herr Momus. But you refused, and yetfrom now on no other way will remain for you but thisone. But frankly, after your attempt on Klamm'sprivacy, with much less prospect of success. All thesame this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisiblehope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," saidK., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from


THE CASTLE

144
seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see limquite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely ®onaccount of the miscarrying of my plan ? If at one timeyou can advise me sincerely from your heart againsttrying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly driveme on the road to Klamm now, apparently just assincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road maynot reach as far as him ? '' ** Am I driving you on ? "
asked the landlady. Do yeu call it driving you onwhen I tell you that your attempt is hopeless ? Itwould really be the limit of audacity if you tried inthat way to push the responsibility on to me. Perhapsit's Herr Momus's presence that encourages you to do it. 
No, Land Surveyor, I'm not trying to drive you on toanytliing. I can admit only one mistake, that I over-estimated you a little when I first saw you. Yourimmediate victory over Frieda frightened me, I didn'tknow what you might still be capable of. I wantedto prevent further damage, and thought that the onlymeans of achieving that was to shake your resolution byprayers and tlircats. Since then I have learned to lookon the whole thing more calmly. You can do whatyou like. Your actions may no doubt leave deep foot-prints in the snow out there in the courtyard, but they'lldo nothing more." " The contradiction doesn't seemto me to be quite cleared up," said K., " but I'mcontent with having drawn attention to it. But now Ibeg you, Mr. Secretary, to tell me whether the landlady'sopinion is correct, that is, that the protocol which youwant to take down from my answers can have the resultof gaining me admission to Klamm. If that's the case. 
I'm ready to answer all your questions at once. Inthat direction I'm ready, indeed, for anything." " No,"replied Momus, " that doesn't follow at all. It's simply


THE CASTLE

145
a matter of keeping an adequate record of this afternoon'shappenings for Klamm's village register. The record isalready complete, there are only two or three omissionswhich you must fill in for the sake of order ; there's noother object in view and no other object can beachieved." K. gazed at the landlady in silence. " Whyare you looking at me ? " asked she, " did I say any-thing else ? He's always like that, Mr. Secretary, he'salwa)’S like that. Falsifies «4ie information one gives him,and then maintains that he received false information. 
Tve told him from the first and I tell him again to-daythat he hasn't the faintest prospect of being received byKlamm ; well, if there's no prospect in any case hewon’t alter that fact by means of this protocol. Couldanything be clearer ? I said further that this protocol isthe only real official connection that he can have withKlamm. That too is surely clear and incontestableenough. But if in spite of that he won't believe me, andkeeps on hoping — I don't know why or with what idea— that he’ll be able to reach Klamm, then so long as heremains in that frame of mind, the only thing that canhelp him is this one real official connection he has withKlamm, in other words, this protocol. That’s all Ihave said, and whoever maintains the contrary twists mywords maliciously." " If that is so, madam," said K.,“ then I beg your pardon, and I've misunderstood you ;for I thought — erroneously, as it turns out now — thatI could take out of your former words that there wasstill some very tiny hope for me." " Certainly," repliedthe landlady, " that's my meaning exactly. You'retwisting my words again, only this time in the oppositeway. In my opinion there is such a hope for you, andfounded actually on this protocol and nothing else. Butit’s not of such a nature that you can simply fall on


THE CASTLE

146
Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be allegedto see Klamm if I answer your questions ? ' whena child asks questions like that people laugh, when agrown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; HenMomus graciously concealed this under the politenessof his reply. But the hope that I mean consists simplyin this, that through the protocol you have a sort ofconnection, a sort of connection perhaps with Klamm. 
Isn't that enough ? If anyo»e enquired for any servicewhich might earn you the privilege of such a hope,could you bring forward the slightest one ? For thelast time, that's the best that can be said about this hopeof yours, and certainly Herr Momus in his officialcapacity could never give even the slightest hint of it. 
h\)r him it's a matter, as he says, merely of keeping arecord of this afternoon's happenings, for the sake oforder ; more than that he won't say, even if you askhim this minute his opinion of what I've said." " WillKlamm, then, Mr. Secretary," asked K., " read theprotocol ? " "No," replied Momus, " why should he ?
Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. 

' Keep away from me with your protocols ! ' he usuallysays." " Land Surveyor," groaned the landlady,
" you exhaust me with such questions. Do you thinkit's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klammshould read this protocol and become acquainted wordfor word with the trivialities of your life ? Shouldn't yourather pray humbly that the protocol should be con-cealed from Klamm — a prayer, however, that wouldbe just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hideanything from Klamm even though he has given manysigns of his sympathetic nature ? And is it even ^necessary for what you call your hope ? Haven't youadmitted yourself that you would be content if you only


THE CASTLE

gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he neverlooked at you and never listened to you ? And won'tyou achieve that at least through the protocol, perhapsmuch more ? " “ Much more ? " asked K. In what

way ? " If you wouldn't always talk about thingslike a child, as if they were for eating I Who on earthcan give any answer to such questions ? The protocolwill be put 41 Klamm's village register, you have heardthat already, more than fhat can't be said with cer-tainty. But do you know yet the full importance of theprotocol, and of Herr Momus, and of the village register ?Do you know what it means to be examined by HerrMomus ? Perhaps — to all appearances at least — hedoesn't know it himself. He sits quietly there anddoes his duty, for the sake of order, as he says. Butconsider that Klamm appointed him, that he acts inKlamm’s name, that what he docs, even if it never

reaches Klamm, has yet Klamm's assent in advance. 
And how can anything have Klamm's assent that isn'tfilled by his spirit ? Far be it from me to offer HerrMomus crude flattery — ^besides he would absolutelyforbid it himself — but I'm speaking of him not as anindependent person, but as he is when he has Klamm'sassent, as at present ; then he's an instrument in the handof Klamm, and woe to anybody who doesn't obey him."
The landlady's threats did not daunt K. ; of thehopes with which she tried to catch him he was weary. 
Klamm was far away. Once the landlady had com-pared Klamm to an eagle, and that had seemed absurdin K.'s eyes, but it did not seem absurd now ; he thoughtof Klamm's remoteness, of his impregnable dwelling, ofhis silence, broken perhaps only by cries such as K. hadnever yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, whichcould never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings


THE CASTLE

148
which could never be disturbed by anything that K. ^diddown below, which far above he followed at the behestof incomprehensible laws and which only for instantswere visible — all these things Klamm and the eaglehad in common. But assuredly these had nothing todo with the protocol, over which just now Momus wascrumbling a roll dusted with salt, which he was eatingwith beer to help it out, in the process all the papersbecoming covered with salt aftd carraway seeds. 

“ Good night,'* said K. I've an objection to any kindof examination,** and now he went at last to the door. 

He's going after all,** said Momus almost anxiouslyto the landlady. He won't dare," said she ; K. heardnothing more, he was already in the hall. It was coldand a strong wind was blowing. From a door on theopposite side came the landlord, he seemed to havebeen keeping the hall under observation from behinda peephole. He had to hold the tail of his coat roundhis knees, the wind tore so strongly at him in the hall. 
"You're going already. Land Surveyor?" he asked. 
" You're surprised at that ? " asked K. " I am," saidthe landlord, " haven't you been examined then ? "" No," replied K. " I didn't let myself be examined."" Why not ? " asked the landlord. " I don't know,"said K., " why I should let myself be examined, whyI should give in to a joke or an official whim. Perhapssome other time I might have taken it on my side too asa joke or as a whim, but not to-day." " Why cer-tainly, certainly," said the landlord, but he agreedonly out of politeness, not from conviction. " I must letthe servants into the taproom now," he said presently," it's long past their time. Only I didn't want todisturb the examination." " Did you consider it asimportant as all that ? " asked K. " Well, yes,"


THE CASTLE

149
replied the landlord. “ I shouldn't have refused,"said K. " No," replied the landlord, " you shouldn'thave done that." Seeing that K. was silent, he added,whether to comfort K. or to get away sooner : " Well,well, the sky won't rain sulphur for all that." " No,"replied K., " the weather signs don't look like it." Andthey parted laughing. 


X
K STEPPED out into the windswept street and4 peered into the darkness. Wild, wild weather. 
As if there were some connection between the two hereflected again how the landlady had striven to makehim accede to the protocol, and how he had stood out. 
The landlady's attempt had of course not been astraightforward one, surreptitiously she had tried toput him against the protocol at the same time ; inreality he could not tell whether he had stood out orgiven in. An intriguing nature, acting blindly, itseemed, like the wind, according to strange and remotebehests which one could never guess at. 

He had only taken a few steps along the main streetwhen he saw two swaying lights in the distance ; thesesigns of life gladdened him and he hastened towardsthem, while they, too, made in his direction. He couldnot tell why he was so disappointed when he recognisedthe assistants. Still, they were coming to meet him,evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns whichdelivered him from the darkness roaring round himwere his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, hehad expected something else, not those old acquaint-


150

THE CASTLE

ances who were such a burden to him. But the assist-ants were not alone ; out of the darkness between themBarnabas stepped out. ** Barnabas ! ** cried K. and heheld out his hand, have you come to see me ? Thesurprise at meeting him again drowned at first all theannoyance which he had once felt at Barnabas. ''Tosee you,'* replied Barnabas unalterably friendly asbefore, " with a letter from Klamm." " A letter fromKlamm ! " cried K. throwing -hack his head. " Lightshere I " he called to the assistants, who now pressedclose to him on both sides holding up their lanterns. 
K. had to fold the large sheet in small compass to protectit from the wind while reading it. Then he read : "Tothe Land Surveyor at the Bridge Inn. The surveyingwork which you have carried out thus far has beenappreciated by me. The work of the assistants, too,deserves praise. You know how to keep them at theirjobs. Do not slacken in your efforts ! Carry yourwork on to a fortunate conclusion. Any interruptionwould displease me. For the rest be easy in your mind ;the question of salary will presently be decided. Ishall not forget you." K. only looked up from theletter when the assistants, who read far more slowlythan he, gave three loud cheers at the good newsand waved their lanterns. " Be quiet," he said, andto Barnabas : " There's been a misunderstanding."
Barnabas did not seem to comprehend. " There's beena misunderstanding," K. repeated, and the wearinesshe had felt in the afternoon came over him again, theroad to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behindBarnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist-ants were still jostling him so closely that he had todrive them away with his elbows ; how could Friedahave sent them to meet him when he had commanded


THE CASTLE

that they should stay with her ? He could quite wellhave found his own way home, and better done, in-deed, than in this company. And to make mattersworse one of them had wound a scarf round his neckwhose free ends flapped in the wind and had severaltimes been flung against K.'s face ; it is true, the otherassistant had always disengaged the wrap at once withhis long, pointed, perpetually mobile fingers, but thathad not macfe things any better. Both of them seemedto have considered it an actual pleasure to walk hereand back, and the wind and the wildness of the nightthrew them into raptures. ** Get out ! '' shouted K.,“ seeing that you've come to meet me, why haven'tyou brought my stick ? What have I now to drive youhome with ? " They crouched behind Barnabas, butthey were not too frightened to set their lanterns ontheir protector's shoulders, right and left ; however, heshook them off at once. ** Barnabas," said K., and hefelt a weight on his heart when he saw that Barnabasobviously did not understand him, that though histunic shone beautifully when fortune was there, whenthings became serious no help was to be found in him,but only dumb opposition, opposition against which onecould not fight, for Barnabas himself was helpless, hecould only smile, but that was of just as little help as thestars up there against this tempest down below. " Lookwhat Klamm has written ! " said K., holding the letterbefore his face. " He has been wrongly informed. Ihaven't done any surveying at all, and you see yourselfhow much the assistants are worth. And obviously, too,I can't interrupt work which I’ve never begun ; I can'teven excite the gentleman's displeasure, so how can Ihave earned his appreciation ? As for being easy in mymind, I can never be that." " I'll see to it," said


THE CASTLE

152
Barnabas, who all the time had been gazing past theletter, which he could not have read in any case, for hewas holding it too close to his face* Oh,'' said K., youpromise me that you'll see to it, but can I really believeyou 7 I'm in need of a trustworthy messenger, nowmore than ever." K. bit his lips with impatience. 
"Sir," replied Barnabas, with a gentle inclination ofthe head — K. almost allowed himself to be seduced byit again into believing Barnabas — " I'll certiinly see to it,and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me lasttime as well." " What ! " cried K., " haven't you seento that yet then 7 Weren't you at the Castle next 4ay ? "" No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seenhim yourself, and there happened to be a great deal ofwork just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be goingto the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinkingof, you incomprehensible fellow 7 " cried K., beatinghis brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs comebefore everything else, then ? You're in an importantposition, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me inthis wretched manner ! What does your father's workmatter 7 Klamm is waiting for this information, andinstead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him,you prefer to clean the stable ! " " My father is a
cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had ordersfrom Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant."" Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. bitingly, as ifhe wanted to abolish the words for ever. " And whocan need boots here in these eternally empty streets 7And what is all this cobbling to me ? I entrusted youwith a letter, not so that you might mislay it andcrumple it on your bench, but that you might carryit at once to Klamm I " K. became a little more com-posed now as he remembered that after all Klamm had


THE CASTLE

153
apparently been all this time in the Herrenhof and notin the Castle at all ; but Barnabas exasperated himagain when, to prove that he had not forgotten K/sfirst message he now began to recite it. Enough ! Idon't want to hear any more," he said. " Don't be angrywith me, sir," said Barnabas, and as if unconsciouslywishing to show disapproval of K. he withdrew his gazefrom him and lowered his eyes, but probably he wasonly dejected by K.'s outburst. " I'm not angry withyou," said K., and his exasperation turned now againsthimself. " Not with you, but it's a bad lookout forme only to have a messenger like you for importantaffairs." " Look here," said Barnabas, and it was as if,to vindicate his honour as a messenger, he was sayingmore than he should, " Klamm is really not waiting foryour message, he's actually cross when I arrive. ‘ An-other new message,' he said once, and generally he getsup when he sees me coming in the distance and goesinto the next room and doesn't receive me. Besides, itisn't laid down that I should go at once with everymessage ; if it were laid down of course I would go atonce ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all,nothing could be said to me. When I take a messageit's of my own free will." "Well and good," repliedK., staring at Barnabas and intentionally ignoring theassistants, who kept on slowly raising their heads byturns behind Barnabas's shoulder as from a trap-door,and hastily disappearing again with a soft whistle inimitation of the whistling of the wind, as if they wereterrified at K. ; they enjoyed themselves like this for along time. " What it's like with Klamm I don't know,but that you can understand everything there properlyI very much doubt, and even if you did, we couldn'tbetter things there. But you can carry a message and


the castle

154
that's all I ask you. A quite short message. Can youcarry it for me to-morrow and bring me the answerto-morrow, or at least tell me how you were received )Can you do that and will you do that ? It would be ofgreat service to me. And perhaps I'll have a chanceyet of rewarding you properly, or have you any wishnow, perhaps, that I can fulfil ? " " Certainly I'll
carry out your orders," said Barnabas. " And willyou do your utmost to carry them out as well as you can,to give the message to Klamm himself, to get a replyfrom Klamm himself, and immediately, all this imme-diately, to-morrow, in the morning, will you do that ? "" I'll do my best," replied Barnabas, " but I always dothat." " We won't argue any more about it now," saidK. " This is the message : ' The Land Surveyor begsthe Director to grant him a personal interview ; heaccepts in advance any conditions which may be at-tached to the permission to do this. He is driven tomake this request because until now every intermediaryhas completely failed ; in proof of this he advances thefact that till now he has not carried out any surveyingat all, and according to the information given him bythe village Superintendent will never carry out suchwork ; consequently it is with humiliation and despairthat he has read the last letter of the Director ; only apersonal interview with the Director can be of anyhelp here. The Land Surveyor knows how extra-ordinary his request is, but he will exert himself to makehis disturbance of the Director as little felt as possible ;he submits himself to any and every limitation of time,also any stipulation which may be considered necessaryas to the number of words which may be allowed himduring the interview, even with ten words he believeshe will be able to manage. In profound respect and


THE CASTLE

155
extreme impatience he awaits your decision/' K. hadforgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if hewere standing before Klamm's door talking to theporter. It has grown much longer than I hadthought," he said, " but you must learn it by heart, Idon’t want to write a letter, it would only go the sameendless way as the other papers." So for Barnabas'sguidance, K. scribbled it on a scrap of paper on theback of one ^Jf the assistants, while the other assistantheld up the lantern ; but already K. could take itdown from Barnabas's dictation, for he had retainedit all and spoke it out correctly without being putoff by the misleading interpolations of the assistants. 

You've an extraordinary memory," said K., givinghim the paper, " but now show yourself extraordinaryin the other thing as well. And any requests ? Haveyou none ? It would reassure me a little — ^I say itfrankly — regarding the fate of my message, if you hadany." At first Barnabas remained silent, then he said :" My sisters send you their greetings." " Your sisters,"replied K. " Oh, yes, the big strong girls." " Bothsend you their greetings, but Amalia in particular,"said Barnabas, " besides it was she who brought methis letter for you to-day from the Castle." Struck bythis piece of information, K. asked : " Couldn't she
take my message to the Castle as well ? Or couldn'tyou both go and each of you try your luck ? " " Amalia
isn't allowed into the Chancellory," said Barnabas,otherwise she would be very glad to do it." " I'llcome and see you perhaps to-morrow," said K., " onlyyou come to me first with the answer. I'll wait foryou in the school. Give my greetings to your sisters,too," K.'s promise seemed to make Barnabas veryhappy, and after they had shaken hands he could not


THE CASTLE

156
help touching K. lightly on the shoulder. , As if every-thing were once more as it had been when Barnabasfirst walked into the inn among the peasants in all hisglory, K. felt this touch on his shoulder as a distinction,though he smiled at it. In a better mood now, he letthe assistants do as they pleased on the way home. 


XI
H e reached the school chilled through and through,it was quite dark, the candles in the lanterns hadburned down ; led by the assistants, who already knewtheir way here, he felt his road into one of the classrooms. 
“ Your first praiseworthy service, he said, remember-ing Klamm's letter. Still half-asleep Frieda aied outfrom a corner : ** Let K. sleep ! Don't disturb him ! "so entirely did K. occupy her thoughts, even though shehad been so overcome with sleep that she had not beenable to wait up for him. Now a light was got, but thelamp could not be turned up very far, for there wasonly a little paraffin left. The new household was stillwithout many necessaries. The room had been heated,it was true, but it was a large one, sometimes used asthe g}^mnasium — the gymnastic apparatus was standingabout and hanging from the ceiling — and it had alreadyused up all the supply of wood — had been very warmand cosy too, as K. was assured, but unfortunately hadgrown quite cold again. There was, however, a largesupply of wood in a shed, but the shed was locked andthe teacher had the key ; he only allowed this woodto be used for heating the school during teaching hours. 
The room could have been endured if there had been


THE CASTLE

157
beds where one might have taken refuge. But in thatline there was nothing but one sack stuffed with straw,covered with praiseworthy tidiness by a woollen rugof Frieda's, but with no feather-bed and only two rough,stiff blankets, which hardly served to keep one warm. 
And it was precisely at this wretched sack of straw thatthe assistants were staring greedily, but of course with-out any hope of ever being allowed to lie on it. Friedalooked anxiously at K. ; that she knew how to make aroom, even the most wretched, habitable, she hadproved in the Bridge Inn, but here she had not beenable to make any headway, quite without means asshe was. Our only ornaments are the gymnasticcontraptions," said she, trying to smile through hertears. But for the chief deficiencies, the lack of sleepingaccommodation and fuel, she promised absolutely tofind help the very next day, and begged K. only to bepatient till then. From no word, no hint, no signcould one have concluded that she harboured even theslightest trace of bitterness against K. in her heart,although, as he had to admit himself, he had torn heraway first from the Herrenhof and now from the BridgeInn as well. So in return K. did his best to find every-thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed,because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeatinghis message word for word, not however as he had givenit to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound beforeKlamm. After all, however, he was very sincerely gladof the coffee which Frieda had boiled for him on a spiritburner, and leaning against the almost cold stovefollowed the nimble, practised movements with whichshe spread the indispensable white table-cover on theteacher's table, brought out a flowered cup, then somebread and sausage, and actually a box of sardines. 



THE CASTLE

158
Now everything was ready ; Frieda, too, had not eatenyet, but had waited for K. Two chairs were available,there K* and Frieda sat down to their table, the assistantsat their feet on the dais, but they could never stayquiet, even while eating they made a disturbaiice. 
Although they had received an ample store of everythingand were not yet nearly finished with it, they got upfrom time to time to make sure whether there was stillanything on the table and they could still expect some-thing for themselves ; K. paid no attention to themand only began to take notice when Frieda laughed atthem. He covered her hand with his tenderly and askedsoftly why she was so indulgent to them and treatedeven their naughtinesses so kindly. In this way onewould never get rid of them, while through a certaindegree of severity, which besides was demanded bytheir behaviour, one could manage either to curb themor, what was both more probable and more desirable,to make their position so hot for them that they wouldhave finally to leave. The school here didn't seemto be a very pleasant place to live in for long, well, itwouldn't last very long in any case ; but they wouldhardly notice all the drawbacks if the assistants wereonce gone and they two had the quiet house to them-selves ; and didn't she notice, too, that the assistantswere becoming more impudent every day, as if theywere actually encouraged now by Frieda's presence andthe hope that K. wouldn't treat them with such firmnessas he would have done in other circumstances ? Besides,there were probably quite simple means of getting ridof them at once, without ceremony, perhaps Friedaherself knew of these, seeing that she was so well ac-quainted with all the circumstances. And froih allappearances one would only be doing the assistants a


THE CASTLE

159
favour if one got rid of them in some way, for theadvantage they got by staying here couldn't be great,and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyedtill now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate,fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herselfafter the excitements of the last few days, and he, K.,was occupied in finding a way out of their painfulpositioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, hewould be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carryout all the school work in addition to his other duties. 

Frieda, who had been listening attentively, strokedhis arm and said that that was her opinion too, but thatperhaps he took the assistants' mischief too seriously ;they were mere lads, full of spirits and a little silly nowthat they were for the first time in strange service, justreleased from the strict discipline of the Castle, and so alittle dazed and excited ; and being in that state theyof course committed lots of follies at which it wasnatural to be annoyed, but which it would be moresensible to laugh at. Often she simply couldn't keepfrom laughing. All the same she absolutely agreedwith K. that it would be much better to send theassistants away and be by themselves, just the two ofthem. She pressed closer to K. and hid her face on hisshoulder. And there she whispered something so lowthat K. had to bend his head to hear ; it was that allthe same she knew of no way of dealing with theassistants and she was afraid that all that K. hadsuggested would be of no avail. So far as she knew itwas K. himself who had asked for them, and now hehad them and would have to keep them. It would bebest to treat them as a joke, which they certainly were ;that would be the best way to put up with them. 

K. was displeased by her answer : half in jest, half in


THE CASTLE

i6o
earnest, he replied that she seemed actually to be inleague with them, or at least to have a strong inclina-tion in their favour ; well, they were good-looking lads,but there was nobody who couldn't be got rid of if onlyone had the will, and he would show her that that wasso in the case of the assistants. 

Frieda said that she would be very grateful to himif he could manage it. And from now on she wouldn'tlaugh at them any more, noF have any unnecessary talkwith them. Besides she didn't find anything now tolaugh at, it was really no joke always to be spied on bytwo men, she had learned to look at the two of themwith K.'s eyes. And she actually shrank a little whenthe assistants got up again, partly to have a look atthe food that was left, partly to get at the bottom of thecontinued whispering. 

K. employed this incident to increase Frieda's disgustfor the assistants, drew her towards him, and so sideby side they finished their supper. Now it was time togo to bed, for they were all very sleepy ; one of theassistants had actually fallen asleep over his food ; thisamused the other one greatly, and he did his best to getthe others to look at the vacant face of his companion,but he had no success. K. and Frieda sat on abovewithout paying any attention. The cold was becomingso extreme that they shirked going to bed ; at last K. 
declared that the room must be heated, otherwise itwould be impossible to get to sleep. He looked roundto see if he could find an axe or something. Theassistants knew of one and fetched it, and now theyproceeded to the wood shed. In a few minutes theflimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they hadnever yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistantsbegan to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding


THE CASTLE

l6l
rach other on and knocking against each other ; soonthere was a great pile, the stove was set going, every-body lay down round it, the assistants were given ablanket to roll themselves in — it was quite ample forthem, for it was decided that one of them should alwaysremain awake and keep the fire going — and soon it wasso hot round the stove that the blankets were no longerneeded, the lamps were put out, and K. and Frieda happilystretched themselves out to^sleep in the warm silence. 

K. was awakened during the night by some noiseor other, and in his first vague sleepy state felt forFrieda ; he found that, instead of Frieda, one of theassistants was lying beside him. Probably because ofthe exacerbation which being suddenly awakened issufficient in itself to cause, this gave him the greatestfright that he had ever had since he first came to thevillage. With a cry he sat up, and not knowing whathe was doing gave the assistant such a buffet that hebegan to cry. However the whole thing was clearedup in a moment. Frieda had been awakened — atleast so it had seemed to her — by some huge animal, acat probably, which had sprung on to her breast andthen leapt away again. She had got up and wassearching the whole room for the beast with a candle. 
One of the assistants had seized the opportunity toenjoy the sack of straw for a little, an attempt which hewas now bitterly repenting. Frieda could find nothing,however ; perhaps it had only been a delusion, shewent back to K. and on the way she stroked the crouch-ing and whimpering assistant over the hair to comforthim, as if she had forgotten the evening’s conversation. 
K. said nothing, but he asked the assistant to stopputting wood on the fire, for owing to almost all the heaphaving been squandered the room was already too hot. 



ibl

THE CASTLE

XII
N ext moming nobody awoke until the schoolchildren were there, standing with gaping eyesround the sleepers. This was unpleasant, for onaccount of the intense heat, which now towards morninghad given way, however, to a coldness \^hich could befelt, they had all taken off everything but their shirts,and just as they were beginning to put on their clothes,Gisa, the lady teacher, appeared at the door, a fair, tall,beautiful, but somewhat stiff young woman. She wasevidently prepared for the new janitor, and seemedalso to have been given her instructions by the teacher,for as soon as she appeared at the door, she began :
I can't put up with this. This is a fine state of affairs. 
You have permission to sleep in the classroom, but that'sall ; I am not obliged to teach in your bedroom. Ajanitor’s family that loll in their beds far into the fore-noon ! Faugh I ” Well, something might be said aboutthat, particularly as far as the family and the beds wereconcerned, thought K., while with Frieda's help— theassistants were of no use, lying on the floor they lookedin amazement at the lady teacher and the children—he dragged across the parallel bars And the vaultinghorse, threw the blanket over them, and so constructeda little room in which one could at least get on one'sclothes protected from the children’s gaze. He wasnot given a minute's peace, however, for the lady teacherbegan to scold because there was no fresh water in thewashing basin — K. had just been thinking of fetching thebasin for himself and Frieda to wash in, but he had atonce given up the idea so as not to exasperate the lady


THE CASTLE

163
teacher too much, but his renunciation was of no avail,for immediately afterwards there was a loud crash ;unfortunately, it seemed, they had forgotten to clearaway the remains of the supper from the teacher'stable, so she sent it all flying with her ruler and every-thing fell on the floor ; she didn't need to bother aboutthe sardine oil and the remainder of the coffee being spiltand the coffee-pot smashed to pieces, the janitor ofcourse could soon clear ijiat up. Clothed once more,K. and Frieda, leaning on the parallel bars, witnessedthe destruction of their few things. The assistants, whohad obviously never thought of putting on their clothes,had stuck their heads through a fold of the blanketsnear the floor, to the great delight of the children. 
What grieved Frieda most was naturally the loss ofthe coffee-pot ; only when K. to comfort her assuredher that he would go immediately to the village Super-intendent and demand that it should be replaced, andsee that this was done, was she able to gather herselftogether sufficiently to run out of their stockade in herchemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at leastfrom being stained any more. And she managed it,though the lady teacher to frighten her kept on hammer-ing on the table with the ruler in the most nerve-racking fashion. When K. and Frieda were quiteclothed they had to compel the assistants — who seemedto be struck dumb by these events — to get their clotheson as well : had not merely to order them and pushthem, indeed, but actually to put some of their clotheson for them. Then, when all was ready, K. shared outthe remaining work ; the assistants were to bring inwood and light the fire, but in the other classroomsfirst, from which another and greater danger threatened,for the teacher himself was probably already there. 



THE CASTLE

164
Frieda was to scrub the floor and K. would fetch freshwater and set things to rights generally. For the timebeing breakfast could not be thought of. But so asto find out definitively the attitude of the lady teacher,K. decided to issue from their shelter himself first, theothers were only to follow when he called them ; headopted this policy on the one hand because he didnot want the position to be compromised in advanceby any stupid act of the assistants, and On the otherbecause he wanted Frieda to be spared as much aspossible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, shewas sensitive and he was not, she only thought of thepetty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinkingof Barnabas and the future. Frieda followed all hisinstructions implicitly, and scarcely took her eyes fromhim. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacheraied amid the laughter of the children, which fromnow on never stopped : ** Slept well ? and as K. 

paid no attention — seeing that after all it was not a realquestion — but began to clear up the washstand, sheasked : ** What have you been doing to my cat ? ” Ahuge, fat old cat was lying lazily outstretched on thetable, and the teacher was examining one of its pawswhich was evidently a little hurt. So Frieda had beenright after all, this cat had not of course leapt on her,for it was past the leaping stage, but it had crawledover her, had been terrified by the presence of peoplein the empty house, had concealed itself hastily, and inits unaccustomed hurry had hurt itself. K. tried toexplain this quietly to the lady teacher, but the onlything she had eyes for was the injury itself and shereplied : “ Well, then it's your fault through cominghere. Just look at this," and she called K. over to thetable, showed him the paw, and before he could get a




THE CASTLE

165
proper look at it, gave him a whack with the tawseover the back of his hand ; the tails of the tawse wereblunted, it was true, but, this time witliout any regardfor the cat, she had brought them down so sharply thatthey raised bloody weals. And now go about yourbusiness,*' she said impatiently, bowing herself oncemore over the cat. Frieda, who had been looking onwith the assistants from behind the parallel bars, criedout when shfe saw the bictod. K. held up his hand infront of the children and said : Look, that's what a
sly, wicked cat has done to me." He said it, indeed,not for the children's benefit, whose shouting andlaughter had become continuous, so that it needed nofurther occasion or incitement, and could not be piercedor influenced by any words of his. But seeing tliat thelady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by abrief side-glance, and remained still occupied with thecat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. 
called Frieda and the assistants, and the work began. 

When K. had carried out the pail with the dirtywater, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turnout the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped outfrom his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said somethingwhich was quite lost in the general uproar. Thensuddenly every sound ceased and K. turned round. 
The thing he had been fearing all morning had come. 
In the door stood the teacher ; in each hand the littleman held an assistant by the scruff of the neck. Hehad caught them, it seemed, while they were fetchingwood, for in a mighty voice he began to shout, pausingafter every word : " Who has dared to break into thewood-shed ? Where is the villain, so that I may annihi-late him ? " Then Frieda got up from the floor, whichshe was trying to clean near the feet of the lady teacher,


i66

THE CASTLE

looked across at K. as if she were trying to gatherstrength from him, and said, a little of her old super-ciliousness in her glance and bearing ; “ I did it, Mr. 
Teacher. I couldn't think of any other way. If theclassrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shedhad to be opened ; I didn’t dare to ask you for the keyin the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren-hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, soI had to decide for myself. “If I have dcITne wrongly,forgive my inexperience ,* I've been scolded enoughalready by my fianc^, after he saw what had happened. 
Yes, he even forbade me to light the fires early, becausehe thought that you had shown by locking the wood-shed that you didn't want them to be put on beforeyou came yourself. So it's his fault that the fires arenot on, but mine that the shed has been broken into."" Who broke open the door ? " asked the teacher, turn-ing to the assistants, who were still vainly strugglingto escape from his grip. " The gentleman," they bothreplied, and, so that there might be no doubt, pointedat K. Frieda laughed, and her laughter seemed to bestill more conclusive than her words ; then she beganto wring out into the pail the rag with which she hadbeen SCTubbing the floor, as if the episode had beenclosed with her declaration, and the evidence of theassistants were merely a belated jest. Only when shewas at work on her knees again did she add : " Ourassistants are mere children who in spite of their ageshould still be at their desks in school. Last evening Ireally did break open the door myself with the axe, itwas quite easy, I didn’t need the assistants to help me,they would only have been a nuisance. But when myfianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see thedamage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran




THE CASTLE

167
out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stayhere by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working atthe broken door, and that’s why they say now — but
they’re only children ” True, the assistants kept
on shaking their heads during Frieda’s story, pointedagain at K. and did their best by means of dumb showto deflect her from her story ; but as they did notsucceed they submitted at last, took Frieda's words as acommand, and on being qu«tioned anew by the teachermade no reply. ** So,” said the teacher, ” you’ve beenlying ? Or at least you’ve groundlessly accused thejanitor ? ” They still remained silent, but theirtrembling and their apprehensive glances seemed toindicate guilt. ” Then I’ll give you a sound thrashingstraight away,” he said, and he sent one of the childreninto the next room for his cane. Then as he was raisingit, Frieda cried ; ” The assistants have told the truth ! ”flung her scrubbing-cloth in despair into the pail, sothat the water splashed up on every side, and ranbehind the parallel bars, where she remained concealed. 
” A lying crew ! ” remarked the lady teacher, who hadjust finished bandaging the paw, and she took the beastinto her lap, for which it was almost too big. 

” So it WiU the janitor,” said the teacher, pushingthe assistants away and turning to K., who had beenlistening all the time leaning on the handle of hisbroom : ” This fine janitor who out of cowardice
allows other people to be falsely accused of his ownvillainies.” ” Well,” said K., who had not missed thefact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the firstuncontrollable fury of the teacher, ” if the assistantshad got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have beensorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justlybe punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being


THE CASTLE

l68
punished unjustly for once* But besides that it wouldhave been very welcome to me if a direct quarrelbetween me and you, Mr. Teacher, could have beenavoided ,* perhaps you would have liked it as wellyourself too. But seeing that Frieda has sacrificed me
to the assistants now " here K. paused, and in the
silence Frieda's sobs could be heard behind the screen— ** of course a clean breast must be made of the wholebusiness," " Scandalous I "• said the ladj^ teacher. " Iam entirely of your opinion, Fraulein Gisa," said theteacher. "You, janitor, are of course dismissed fromyour post for those scandalous doings. Your furtherpunishment I reserve meantime, but now clear yourselfand your belongings out of the house at once. It willbe a genuine relief to us, and the teaching will manageto begin at last. Now quick about it I " " I shan't
move a foot from here," said K. " You're my superior,but not the person who engaged me for this post ; itwas the Superintendent who did that, and I'll onlyaccept notice from him. And he certainly never gaveme this post so that I and my dependents should freezehere, but — as you told me yourself — to keep me fromdoing anything thoughtless or desperate. To dismissme suddenly now would therefore be absolutely againsthis intentions ; till I hear the contrary from his ownmouth I refuse to believe it. Besides it may possibly begreatly to your own advantage, too, if I don't acceptyour notice, given so hastily." " So you don't acceptit ? " asked the teacher. K. shook his head. " Thinkit over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisionsaren't always for the best ; you should reflect, forinstance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused tobe examined." " Why do you bring that up now ?asked K. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher,


THE CASTLE

169
and now I repeat for the last time, get out ! Butas that too had no effect the teacher went over to thetable and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ;she said something about the police, but the teacherrejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacherordered the children to go into his classroom, theywould be taught there along with the other children. 
This change delighted everybody, the room was emptiedin a momenf amid laughter and shouting, the teacherand Fraulein Gisa followed last. The latter carried theclass register, and on it in all its bulk the perfectly in-different cat. The teacher would gladly have left thecat behind, but a suggestion to that effect was negativeddecisively by Fraulein Gisa with a reference to K.'sinhumanity. So, in addition to all his other annoy-ances, the teacher blamed K. for the cat as well. Andthat influenced his last words to K., spoken when hereached the door : The lady has been driven by forceto leave the room with her children, because you haverebelliously refused to accept my notice, and becausenobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she shouldteach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. 
So you are left to yourself, and you can spread yourselfas much as you like, undisturbed by the disapproval ofrespectable people. But it won't last for long, I promiseyou that." With that he slammed the door. 


XIII
H ardly was everybody gone when K. said to theassistants : " Clear out I " Disconcerted by theunexpectedness of the command, they obeyed, butwhen K. locked the door behind them they tried to get


THE CASTLE

170
in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. 
" You are dismissed," cried K., " never again will Itake you into my service I " But that, of course, wasjust what they did not want, and they kept hammeringon the door with their hands and feet. " Let us backto you, sir ! " they cried, as if they were being sweptaway by a flood and K. were dry land. But K. did notrelent, he waited impatiently for the unbearable din toforce the teacher to intervene. That socJn happened. 
" Let your confounded assistants in ! " he shouted. 
" Tve dismissed them," K. shouted back ; it had theincidental effect of showing the teacher what it was tobe strong enough not merely to give notice, but toenforce it. The teacher next tried to soothe the assist-ants by kindly assurances that they had only to waitquietly and K. would have to let them in sooner orlater. Then he went away. And now things mighthave settled down if K. had not begun to shout at themagain that they weie finally dismissed once and for all,and had not the faintest chance of being taken back. 
Upon that they recommenced their din. Once morethe teacher entered, but this time he no longer tried toreason with them, but drove them, apparently with hisdreaded rod, out of the house. 

Soon they appeared in front of the windows of thegymnasium, rapped on the panes and cried something,but their words could no longer be distinguished. Theydid not stay there long either, in the deep snow theycould not be as active as their frenzy required. Sothey flew to the railings of the school garden and sprangon to the stone pediment, where, moreover, thoughonly from a distance, they had a better view of theroom ; there they ran to and fro holding on to therailings, then remained standing and stretched out


THE CASTLE

171
their clasped hands beseechingly towards K. Theywent on like this for a long time, without thinking ofthe uselessness of their efforts ; they were as if obsessed,they did not even stop when K. drew down the windowblinds so as to rid himself of the sight of them. In thenow darkened room K. went over to the parallel barsto look for Frieda. On encountering his gaze she gotup, put her hair in order, dried her tears and began insilence to prefare the coffefe. Although she knew ofeverything, K. formally announced to her all the samethat he had dismissed the assistants. She merely nodded. 
K. sat down at one of the desks and followed her tiredmovements. It had been her unfailing liveliness anddecision that had given her insignificant physique itsbeauty ; now that beauty was gone. A few days ofliving with K. had been enough to achieve this. Herwork in the taproom had not been light, but apparentlyit had been more suited to her. Or was her separationfrom Klamm the real cause of her falling away ? Itwas the nearness of Klamm that had made her so irra-tionally seductive ; that was the seduction which haddrawn K. to her, and now she was withering in his arms. 

'' Frieda,'' said K. She put away the coffee-uiill at^ once and went over to K. at his desk. “ You're angrywith me ? " asked she. “ No," replied K. " I don'tthink you can help yourself. You were happy in theHerrenhof. I should have let you stay there." " Yes,"said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you shouldhave let me stay there. I'm not good enough for youto live with. If you were rid of me, perhaps youwould be able to achieve all that you want. Out ofregard for me you've submitted yourself to the tyrannyof the teacher, taken on this wretched post, and aredoing your utmost to get an interview with Klamm. 



172

THE CASTLE

All for me, but I don't give you much in return." " No,no," said K., putting his arm round her comfortingly. 
" All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, andit's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. 
And then think of all you've done for me ! Before Iknew you I was going about in a blind circle. Nobodytook me up, and if I made up to anybody I was soonsent about my business. And when I was given thechance of a little hospitality it was with people that Ialways wanted to run away from, like Barnabas's
family " "You wanted to run away from them?
You did ? Darling I " cried Frieda eagerly, and aftera hesitating " Yes," from K., sank back once moreinto her apathy. But K. had no longer resolutionenough to explain in what way everything had changedfor the better for him through his connection withFrieda. He slowly took away his arm and they sat fora little in silence, until — as if his arm had given herwarmth and comfort, which now she could not do with-out — Frieda said ; "I won't be able to stand this lifehere. If you want to keep me with you, we'll have togo away somewhere or other, to the south of France,or to Spain." " I can't go away," replied K. "I camehere to stay. I'll stay here." And giving utterance toa self-contradiction which he made no effort to explain,he added as if to himself: " What could have enticedme to this desolate country except the wish to stay here ? * 'Then he went on : " But you want to stay here too,after all it's your own country. Only you miss Klammand that gives you desperate ideas." " I miss Klamm ? "said Frieda, " I've all I want of Klamm here, toomuch Klamm ; it’s to escape from him that I wantto go away. It’s not Klamm that I miss, it's you. 
I want to go away for your sake, because I can't get


THE CASTLE

173
enough of you, here where everything distracts me. 
I would gladly lose my pretty lool«, I would gladly besick and ailing, if I could be left in peace with you/'K. had only paid attention to one thing. ** ThenKlamm is still in communication with you ? heasked eagerly, “ he sends for you ? “I know nothingabout Klamm," replied Frieda, " I was speaking justnow of others, I mean the assistants." " Oh, theassistants," said K. in disappointment, " do theypersecute you ? " " Why, have you never noticed it ? "
cihked Frieda. " No," replied K., trying in vain toremember anything, " they're certainly importunateand lascivious young fellows, but I hadn't noticed thatthey had dared to lift their eyes to you." " No ? " saidFrieda, " did you never notice that they simply weren'tto be driven out of our room in the Bridge Inn, thatthey jealously watched all our movements, that one ofthem finished up by taking my place on that sack ofstraw, that they gave evidence against you a minuteago so as to drive you out of this and ruin you, and soas to be left alone with me ? You've never noticed allthat ? " K. gazed at Frieda without replying. Heraccusations against the assistants were true enough, butall the same they could be interpreted far more in-nocently as simple effects of the ludicrously childish,irresponsible, and undisciplined characters of the two. 
And didn't it also speak against their guilt that theyhad always done their best to go with K. everywhereand not to be left with Frieda ? K. half-suggested this. 
“ It's their deceit," said Frieda, " have you never seenthrough it ? Well, why have you driven them away,if not for those reasons ? " And she went to the window,drew the blind aside a little, glanced out, and then calledK. over. The assistants were still clinging to tlie rail-


THE CASTLE

174
ings ; tired as they must have been by now, they stillgathered their strength together every now and thenand stretched their arms out beseechingly towards theschool. So as not to have to hold on all the time, oneof them had hooked himself on to the railings behindby the tail of his coat. 

“ Poor things ! Poor things I ** said Frieda. 

You ask why I drove them away ? ** asked K. 
** You were the sole caus.^ of that.*' I ? " askedFrieda without taking her eyes from the assistants. 
“ Your much too kind treatment of the assistants,"said K., “ the way you forgave their offences and smiledat them and stroked their hair, your perpetual sym-pathy for them — * Poor things ! Poor things ! * you saidjust now — and finally this last thing that has happened,that you haven't scrupled even to sacrifice me to savethe assistants from a beating." " Yes, that's just it,that's what I've been trying to tell you, that's justwhat makes me unhappy, what keeps me from youeven though I can't think of any greater happinessthan to be with you all the time, without interruption,endlessly, even though I feel that here in this worldthere's no undisturbed place for our love, neither in thevillage nor anywhere else ; and I dream of a grave,deep and narrow, where we could clasp each other inour arms as with iron bars, and I would hide my facein you and you would hide your face in me, and nobodywould ever see us any more. But here — look, there arethe assistants ! It's not you they think of when theyclasp their hands, but me." " And it's not I who amlooking at them," said K., " but you." " Certainly,me," said Frieda almost angrily, " that's what I've beensaying all the time ; why else should they be alwaysat my heels, even if they are messengers of Klamm's ? '


THE CASTLE

175
“ Messengers of Klamm's ? " repeated K. extremelyastonished by this designation, though it seemed naturalenough at the same time. ‘‘ Certainly, messengers ofKlamm's," said Frieda. " Even if they are, still they'resilly boys, too, who need to have more sense hammeredinto them. What ugly black young demons they are,and how disgusting the contrast is between their faces,which one would say belonged to grown-ups, almostto students, •and their silly childish behaviour. Do youthink I don't see that ? It makes me feel ashamed forthem. Well, that's just it, they don't repel me, butI feel ashamed for them. I can't help looking at them. 
When one ought to be annoyed with them, I can onlylaugh at them. When people want to strike them, I canonly stroke their hair. And when I'm lying beside youat night I can't sleep and must always be leaning acrossyou to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleepin the blanket and the other kneeling before the stovedoor putting in wood, and I have to bend forward sofar that I nearly waken you. And it wasn't the catthat frightened me — oh, I've had experience of cats andI've had experience as well of disturbed nights in thetaproom — it wasn't the cat that frightened me, I'mfrightened at myself. No, it didn't need that big beastof a cat to waken me, I start up at the slightest noise. 
One minute I'm afraid you'll waken and spoil every-thing, and the next I spring up and light the candle toforce you to waken at once and protect me." " I knewnothing of all this," said K., "it was only a vaguesuspicion of it that made me send them away ; but nowthey're gone, and perhaps everything will be all right."“ Yes, they're gone at last," said Frieda, but her facewas worried, not happy, " only we don't know whothey are. Messengers of Klamm's I call them in my


THE CASTLE

176
mind, though not seriously, but perhaps they are reallythat. Their eyes — those ingenuous and yet flashingeyes—remind me somehow of Klamm's ; yes, that's it,it's Klamm's glance that sometimes runs through mefrom their eyes. And so it's not true when I say thatI'm ashamed for them. I only wish it were. I knowquite well that anywhere else and in anyone else theirbehaviour would seem stupid and offensive, but inthem it isn't. I watch their cstupid tricks with respectand admiration. But if they're Klamm's messengerswho'll rid us of them ? and besides would it be a goodthing to be rid of them ? Wouldn't you have to fetchthem back at once in that case and be happy if theywere still willing to come ? " “You want me to bringthem back again ? '' asked K. “ No, no ! '' said Frieda,“ it's the last thing I desire. The sight of them, if theywere to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again,the way they would hop round like children and stretchout their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think Iwould be able to stand that. But all the same whenI remember that if you keep on hardening your heartto them, it will keep you, perhaps, from ever gettingadmittance to Klamm, I want to save you by anymeans at all from such consequences. In that casemy only wish is for you to let them in. In that case letthem in now at once. Don't bother about me ; whatdo I matter ? I'll defend myself as long as I can, butif I have to surrender, then I'll surrender with theconsciousness that that, too, is for your sake." “Youonly strengthen me in my decision about the assistants,"said K. “ Never will they come in with my will. Thefact that I've got them out of this proves at least thatin certain circumstances they can be managed, andtherefore, in addition, that they have no real connection

A. 



THE CASTLE

177
with Klamm. Only last night I received a letter fromKlamm from which it was dear that Klamm was quitefalsely informed about the assistants, from which againone can only draw the conclusion that he is completelyindifferent to them, for if that were not so he wouldcertainly have obtained exact information about them. 
And the fact that you see Klamm in them provesnothing, for you’re still, unfortunately, under the land-lady’s influence and see Klamm everywhere. You'restill Klamm's sweetheart, and not my wife yet by a longchalk. Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feelthen as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had onlynewly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as Iactually came, but with the knowledge that only dis-appointments await me, and that I will have to swallowthem down one after another to the very dregs. Butthat is only sometimes," K. added smiling, when hesaw Frieda's dejection at hearing his words, " and atbottom it merely proves one good thing, that is, howmuch you mean to me. And if you order me now tochoose between you and the assistants, that's enoughto decide the assistants' fate. What an idea, to choosebetween you and the assistants I But now I want to berid of them finally, in word and thought as well. Besideswho knows whether the weakness that has come overus both mayn't be due to the fact that we haven'thad breakfast yet ? " ** That's possible," said Frieda,
smiling wearily and going about her work. K., too,grasped the broom again. 

After a while there was a soft rap at the door. 
“ Barnabas I " cried K., throwing down the broom,and with a few steps he was at the door. Frieda staredat him, more terrified at the name than anything else. 
With his trembling hands K. could not turn the old


THE CASTLE

178
lock immediately. Til open in a minute/' he kepton repeating, instead of asking who was actually there. 
And then he had to face the fact that through the wide-open door came in, not Barnabas, but the little boy whohad tried to speak to him before. But K. had no wishto be reminded of him. “ What do you want here ? ”he asked. “ The classes are being taught next door."" Tve come from there/' replied the boy, looking up atK. quietly with his great bw)wn eyes, and standing atattention, with his arms by his side. " What do youwant then ? Out with it ! " said K., bending a littleforward, for the boy spoke in a low voice. " Can Ihelp you ? " asked the boy. " He wants to help us,"said K. to Frieda, and then to the boy : " What's yourname ? " " Hans Brunswick," replied the boy, " fourthstandard, son of Otto Brunswick, master cobbler inMadeleinegasse." " I see, your name is Brunswick,"said K., now in a kinder tone. It came out that Hanshad been so indignant at seeing the bloody weals whichthe lady teacher had raised on K.'s hand, that he hadresolved at once to stand by K. He had boldly slippedaway just now from the classroom next door at the riskof severe punishment, somewhat as a deserter goes overto the enemy. It may indeed have been chiefly somesuch boyish fancy that had impelled him. The serious-ness which he evinced in everything he did seemed toindicate it. Shyness held him back at the beginning,but he soon got used to K. and Frieda, and when hewas given a cup of good hot coffee he became livelyand confidential and began to question them eagerlyand insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of thematter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come toan independent decision about what they should do. 
There was something imperious in his character, but


THE CASTLE

179
it was so mingled with childish innocence that theysubmitted to it without resistance, half-smilingly, halfin earnest. In any case he demanded all their attentionfor himself ; work completely stopped, the breakfastlingered on unconscionably. Although Hans was sittingat one of the scholars* desks and K. in a chair on thedais with Frieda beside him, it looked as if Hans werethe teacher, and as if he were examining them andpassing judgment on their# answers. A faint smile roundhis soft mouth seemed to indicate that he knew quitewell that all this was only a game, but that made himonly the more serious in conducting it ; perhaps, too, itwas not really a smile but the happiness of childhoodthat played round his lips. Strangely enough he onlyadmitted quite late in the conversation that he hadknown K, ever since his visit to Lasemann*s. K. wasdelighted. ** You were playing at the lady's feet ? "asked K. ** Yes," replied Hans, " that was my mother."And now he had to tell about his mother, but he didso hesitatingly and only after being repeatedly asked ;and it was clear now that he was only a child, out ofwhose mouth, it is true — especially in his questions —sometimes the voice of an energetic, far-seeing manseemed to speak ; but then all at once, without transi-tion, he was only a schoolboy again who did not under-stand many of the questions, misconstrued others, andin childish inconsiderateness spoke too low, althoughhe had the fault repeatedly pointed out to him, and outof stubbornness silently refused to answer some of theother questions at all, quite without embarrassment,however, as a grown-up would have been incapable ofdoing. He seemed to feel that he alone had the rightto ask questions, and that by the questions of Friedaand K. some regulation were broken and time wasted. 



THE CASTLE

i8o
That made him sit silent for a long time, his bodyerect, his head bent, his underlip pushed out Friedawas so charmed by his expression at these momentsthat she sometimes put questions to him in the hopethat they would evoke it. And she succeeded severaltimes, but K. was only annoyed. All that they foundout did not amount to much. Hans's mother wasslightly unwell, but what her illness was remained in-definite ; the child which slv had had in <her lap wasHans's sister and was called Frieda (Hans was notpleased by the fact that her name was the same as thelady's who was questioning him), the family lived in thevillage, but not with Lasemann — they had only beenthere on a visit and to be bathed, seeing that Lasemannhad the big tub in which the younger children, towhom Hans didn't belong, loved to bathe and splashabout. Of his father Hans spoke now with respect,now with fear, but only when his mother was notoccupying the conversation ; compared with his motherhis father evidently was of little account, but all theirquestions about Brunswick's family life remained, inspite of their efforts, unanswered. K. learned that thefather had the biggest shoemaker's business in theplace, nobody could compete with him, a fact whichquite remote questions brought again and again ;he actually gave out work to the other shoemakers,for example to Barnabas's father ; in this last case hehad done it of course as a special favour — at least Hans'sproud toss of the head seemed to hint at this, a gesturewhich made Frieda run over and give him a kiss. Thequestion whether he had been in the Castle yet he onlyanswered after it had been repeated several times, andwith a “ No ". The same question regarding his motherhe did not answer at all. At last K. grew tired ; to him. 



Itm

I6I

too, these questions seemed useless, he admitted thatthe boy was right ; besides there was somethinghumiliating in ferreting out family secrets by takingadvantage of a child ; doubly humiliating, however,was the fact that in spite of his effort she had learnednothing. And when to finish the matter he asked theboy what was the help he wanted to offer, he was nolonger surprised to hear that Hans had only wantedto help with the work* in the school, so that theteacher and his assistant might not scold K. so much. 
K. explained to Hans that help of that kind was notneeded, scolding was part of the teacher's nature andone could scarcely hope to avoid it even by the greatestdiligence, the work itself was not hard, and only becauseof special circumstances had it been so far behind thatjnorning, besides scolding hadn't the same effect on K. 
as on a scholar, he shook it off, it was almost a matterof indifference to him, he hoped, too, to get quite clearof the teacher soon. Though Hans had only wantedto help him in dealing with the teacher, however, hethanked him sincerely, but now Hans had better returnto his class, with luck he would not be punished if hewent back at once. Although K. did not emphasiseand only involuntarily suggested that it was simplyhelp in dealing with the teacher which he did notrequire, leaving the question of other kinds of helpopen, Hans caught the suggestion clearly and askedwhether perhaps K. needed any other assistance ; hewould be very glad to help him, and if he were not ina position to help him himself, he would ask his motherto do so, and then it would be sure to be all right. 
When his father had difficulties, he, too, asked Hans'smother for help. And his mother had already askedonce about K., she herself hardly ever left the house, it


THE CASTLE

182
had been a great exception for her to be at Lasemann'sthat day. But he, Hans, often went there to play withLasemann's children, and his mother had once askedhim whether the Land Surveyor had ever happened tobe there again. Only his mother wasn't supposed totalk too much, seeing she was so weak and tired, andso he had simply replied that he hadn't seen the LandSurveyor there, and nothing more had been said ; butwhen he had found K. here in the school, lie had hadto speak to him, so that he might tell his mother thenews. For that was what pleased his mother most,when without her express command one did what shewanted. After a short pause for reflection K. said thathe did not need any help, he had all that he required,but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, andhe thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possiblethat later he might be in need of something and thenhe would turn to Hans, he had his address. In returnperhaps he, K., might be able to offer a little help ; hewas sorry to hear that Hans's mother was ill and thatapparently nobody in the village understood her illness ;if it was neglected like that a trifling malady mightsometimes lead to grave consequences. Now he, K.,had some medical knowledge, and, what was of stillmore value, experience in treating sick people. Manya case which the doctors had given up he had beenable to cure. At home they had called him “ TheBitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. Inany case he would be glad to see Hans's mother andspeak with her. Perhaps he might be able to giveher good advice, for if only for Hans's sake he wouldbe delighted to do it. At &st Hans's eyes lit up at thisoffer, exciting K. to greater urgency, but the outcomewas unsatisfactory, for to several questions Hans re-


THE CASTLE

183
plied, without showing the slightest trace of regret,that no stranger was allowed to visit his mother, shehad to be guarded so carefully ; although that day K,had scarcely spoken to her she had had to stay forseveral days in bed, a thing indeed that often happened. 
But his father had then been very angry with K. andhe would certainly never allow K. to come to thehouse ; he had actually wanted to seek K. out at thetime to punish him for his impudence, only Hans'smother had held him back. But in any case his mothernever wanted to talk with anybody whatever, and herenquiry about K. was no exception to the rule ; onthe contrary, seeing he had been mentioned, she couldhave expressed the wish to see him, but she hadn't doneso, and in that had clearly made known her will. Sheonly wanted to hear about K. but she did not wantto speak to him. Besides it wasn't any real illness thatshe was suffering from, she knew quite well the causeof her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar-ently it was the climate here that she could not stand,but all the same she would not leave the place, onaccount of her husband and children, besides, she wasalready better in health than she used to be. Here K. 
felt Hans's powers of thought visibly increasing in hisattempt to protect his mother from K., from K. whomhe had ostensibly wanted to help ; yes, in the goodcause of keeping K. away from his mother he evencontradicted in several respects what he had said before,particularly in regard to his mother's illness. Never-theless K. marked that even so Hans was still welldisposed towards him, only when his mother was inquestion he forgot everything else ; whoever was setup beside his mother was immediately at a disadvantage ;)ust now it had been K., but it could as well be his


THE CASTLE

184
father, for example. K. wanted to test this suppositionand said that it was certainly thoughtful of Hans'sfather to shield his mother from any disturbance, andif he, K., had only guessed that day at this state ofthings, he would never have thought of venturing tospeak to her, and he asked Hans to make his apologiesto her now. On the other hand he could not quiteunderstand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause ofher sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kepther back from going somewhere else to get well ; onehad to infer that he kept her back, for she only remainedon his account and the children's, but she could takethe children with her, and she need not have to goaway for any long time or for any great distance, evenup on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. 
Hans’s father had no need to fear the cost of the holiday,seeing that he was the biggest shoemaker in the place,and it was pretty certain that he or she had relationsor acquaintances in the Castle who would be glad totake her in. Why did he not let her go ? He shouldn'tunderestimate an illness like this, K. had only seenHans's mother for a minute, but it had actually beenher striking pallor and weakness that had impelled himto speak to her. Even at that time he had been sur-prised that her husband had let her sit there in thedamp steam of the washing and bathing when she wasill, and had put no restraint either on his loud talkwith the others. Hans's father really did not know theactual state of things ; even if her illness had improvedin the last few weeks, illnesses like that had ups anddowns, and in the end, if one did not fight them, theyreturned with redoubled strength, and then the patientwas past help. Even if K. could not speak to Hans'smother, still it would perhaps be advisable if he were


THE CASTLE

185
to speak to his father and draw his attention to all this. 

Hans had listened intently, had understood most ofit, and had been deeply impressed by the threat implicitin this dark advice. Nevertheless he replied that K. 
could not speak to his father, for his father disliked himand would probably treat him as the teacher had done. 
He said this with a shy smile when he was speaking ofK., but sadly and bitterly when he mentioned his father. 
But he added that perhapa K. might be able to speakto his mother all the same, but only without his father'sknowledge. Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftontof him for a little — just like a woman who wants to dosomething forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do itwithout being punished — ^and said that the day afterto-morrow it might be possible, his father was going tothe Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ;then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. 
along to his mother, of course, assuming that his motheragreed, which was however very improbable. Shenever did anything at all against the wishes of his father,she submitted to him in everything, even in things whoseunreasonableness he, Hans, could see through. 

Long before this K. had called Hans up to the dais,drawn him between his knees, and had kept on caressinghim comfortingly. The nearness helped, in spite of Hans'soccasional recalcitrance, to bring about an understand-ing. They agreed finally to the following : Hans wouldfirst tell his mother the entire truth, but, so as to makeher consent easier, add that K. wanted to speak to Bruns-wick himself as well, not about her at all, but about hisown affairs. Besides this was true ; in the course of theconversation K. had remembered that Brunswick, evenif he were a bad and dangerous man, could scarcely behis enemy now, if he had been, according to the informa-


THE CASTLE

l86
tion of the Superintendent, the leader of those who,even if only on political grounds, were in favour ofengaging a Land Surveyor. K.'s arrival in the villagemust therefore have been welcomed by Brunswick. Butin that case his morose greeting that first day and thedislike of which Hans spoke were almost incompre-hensible — perhaps, however, Brunswick had been hurtsimply because K. had not turned to him first for help,perhaps there existed some other misifliderstandingwhich could be cleared up by a few words. But if thatwere done K. might very well secure in Brunswick asupporter against the teacher, yes and against the Super-intendent as well ; the whole olEcial plot — for was itanything else really ? — by means of which the Super-intendent and the teacher were keeping him from reach-ing the Castle authorities and had driven him into takinga janitor's post, might be unmasked ; if it came anewto a fight about K. between Brunswick and the Super-intendent, Brunswick would have to include K. on hisside, K. would become a guest in Brunswick's house,Brunswick's fighting resources would be put at his dis-posal in spite of the Superintendent ; who could tellwhat he might not be able to achieve by those means,and in any case he would often be in the lady's company— so he played with his dreams and they with him, whileHans, thinking only of his mother, painfully watchedK.'s silence, as one watches a doctor who is sunk inreflection while he tries to find the proper remedy for agrave case. With K.'s proposal to speak to Brunswickabout his post as Land Surveyor Hans was in agreement,but only because by means of this his mother would beshielded from his father, and because in any case it wasonly a last resort which with good luck might not beneeded. He merely asked further how K. was to explain


THE CASTLE

187
f to his father the lateness of the visit, and was contentat last, though his face remained a little overcast, withthe suggestion that K. would say that his unendurablepost in the school and the teacher's humiliating treat-, ment had made him in sudden despair forget all caution. 

Now that, so far as one could see, everything had beenprovided for, and the possibility of success at least con-ceded, Hans, freed from his burden of reflection, becamehappier, and chatted for some time longer with K, andafterwards with Frieda — who had sat for a long timeas if absorbed by quite different thoughts, and only nowbegan to take part in the conversation again. Among^ other things she asked him what he wanted to become ;he did not think long but said he wanted to be a manlike K. When he was asked next for his reasons he reallydid not know how to reply, and the question whetherhe would like to be a janitor he answered with a decidednegative. Only through further questioning did theyperceive by what roundabout ways he had arrived at hiswish. K.'s present condition was in no way enviable,but wretched and humiliating ; even Hans saw thisclearly without having to ask other people ; he himselfwould have certainly preferred to shield his motherfrom K.'s slightest word, even from having to see him. 
In spite of this, however, he had come to K. and hadbegged to be allowed to help him, and had been de-liglited when K. agreed ; he imagined, too, that otherpeople felt the same ; and, most important of all, it hadbeen his mother herself who had mentioned K.'s name. 
These contradictions had engendered in him the beliefthat though for the moment K. was wretched and lookeddown on, yet in an almost unimaginable and distantiuture he would excel everybody. And it was just this•absurdly distant future and the glorious developments


THE CASTLE

l88
which were to lead up to it that attracted Hans ; thatwas why he was willing to accept K. even in his presentstate* The peculiar childish-grown-up acuteness of thiswish consisted in the fact that Hans looked on K. as ona younger brother whose future would reach further ^than his own, the future of a very little boy. And itwas with an almost troubled seriousness that, driveninto a corner by Frieda's questions, he at last confessedthose things. K. only cheered him up •again when hesaid that he knew what Hans envied him for ; it wasfor his beautiful walking-stick, which was lying on thetable and with which Hans had been playing absentlyduring the conversation. Now K. knew how to pro-^duce sticks like that, and if their plan were successful hewould make Hans an even more beautiful one. It wasno longer quite clear now whether Hans had not reallymeant merely the walking-stick, so happy was he madeby K/s promise ; and he said good-bye with a glad face,not without pressing K.'s hand firmly and saying : Theday after to-morrow, then."
It had been high time for Hans to go, for shortly after-wards the teacher flung open the door and shouted whenhe saw K. and Frieda sitting idly at the table : " Forgive^my intrusion ! But will you tell me when this place isto be finally put in order ? We have to sit here packedlike herring, so that the teaching can't go on. Andthere are you lolling about in the big gymnasium, andyou've even sent away the assistants to give yourselvesmore room. At least get on to your feet now and geta move on ! " Then to K. : " Now go and bring memy lunch from the Bridge Inn." All this was deliveredin a furious shout, though the words were comparativelyinoffensive. K. was quite prepared to obey, but todraw the teacher he said : " But I've been given notice.'*


THE CASTLE

189
" Notice or no notice, bring me my lunch/' replied theteacher. " Notice or no notice, that's just what I wantto be sure about," said K. " What nonsense is this ? "asked the teacher. "You know you didn't accept thenotice." " And is that enough to make it invalid? "asked K. " Not for me," said the teacher, " you cantake my word for that, but for the Superintendent, itseems, though I can't understand it. But take to yourheels now, or else I'll fling ycMi out in earnest." K. wascontent the teacher then had spoken with the Super-intendent, or perhaps he hadn't spoken after all, buthad merely thought over carefully the Superintendent's^probable intentions, and these had weighed in K.'sfavour. Now K. was setting out hastily to get the lunch,but the teacher called him back from the very doorway,either because he wanted by this counter order to testK.’s willingness to serve, so that he might know howfar he could go in future, or because a fresh fit of im-periousness had seized him, and it gave him pleasureto make K. run to and fro like a waiter. On his side K. 
knew that through too great compliance he would onlybecome the teacher's slave and scapegoat, but withini* certain limits he decided for the present to give way tothe fellow's caprices, for even if the teacher, as had beenshown, had not the power to dismiss him, yet he couldcertainly make the post so difficult that it could not beborne. And the post was more important in K.'s eyesnow than ever before. The conversation with Hanshad raised new hopes in him, improbable, he admitted,completely groundless even, but all the same not to beput out of his mind ; they almost superseded Barnabashimself. If he gave himself up to them — and there wasno choice — then he must husband all his strength, troubleabout nothing else, food, shelter, the village authorities,


THE CASTLE

190
no not even about Frieda — and in reality the wholething turned only on Frieda, for everything else onlygave him anxiety in relation to her. For this reason hemust try to keep this post which gave Frieda a certaindegree of security, and he must not complain if for this . 
end he were made to endure more at the teacher's handsthan he would have had to endure in the ordinary course. 
All that sort of thing could be put up with, it belongedto the ordinary continual petty annoyances of life, it wasnothing compared with what K. was striving for, andhe had not come here simply to. lead an honoured andcomfortable life. 

And so, as he had been ready to run over to the inn, ^he showed himself now willing to obey the second order,and first set the room to rights so that the lady teacherand her children could come back to it. But it had tobe done with all speed, for after that K. had to go forthe lunch, and the teacher was already ravenous. K. 
assured him that it would all be done as he desired ;for a little the teacher looked on while K. hurried up,cleared away the sack of straw, put back the gymnasticapparatus in its place, and swept the room^out whileFrieda washed and scrubbed the dais. Their diligenceseemed to appease the teacher, he only drew their atten-tion to the fact that there was a pile of wood for the fireoutside the door — he would not allow K. further accessto the shed, of course — and then went back to his classwith the threat that he would return soon and inspect. 

After a few minutes of silent work Frieda asked K. 
why he submitted so humbly to the teacher now. Thequestion was asked in a sympathetic, anxious tone, butK., who was thinking how little Frieda had succeededin keeping her origind promise to shield him from thfteacher's orders and insults, merely replied shortly that


THE CASTLE

I9I
since he was the janitor he must fulfil the janitor's duties. 
Then there was silence again until K., remindedvividly by this short exchange of words that Friedahad been for a long time lost in anxious thought — andparticularly through almost the whole conversationwith Hans — asked her bluntly while he carried in thefirewood what had been troubling her. Slowly turningher eyes upon him she replied that it was nothingdefinite, she had only been thinking of the landlady andthe truth of much of what she said. Only when K. 
pressed her did she reply more consecutively afterhesitating several times, but without looking up fiomher work — not that she was thinking of it, for it wasmaking no progress, but simply so that she might not becompelled to look at K. And now she told him thatduring his talk with Hans she had listened quietly atfirst, that then she had been startled by certain wordsof his, then had begun to grasp the meaning of themmore clearly, and that ever since she had not been ableto cease reading into his words a confiimation of a warn-ing whi^h the landlady had once given her, and whichshe had always refused to believe. Exasperated by allthis circumlocution, and more irritated than touchedby Frieda's tearful, complaining voice — but annoyedabove all because the landlady was coming into hisaffairs again, though only as a recollection, for in personshe had had little success up till now — K. flung the woodhe was carrying in his arms on to the floor, sat down onit, and in tones which were now serious demanded thewhole truth. " More than once," began Frieda, " yes,since the beginning, the landlady has tried to make medoubt you, she didn't hold that you were lying, on thecontrary she said that you were childishly open, butyour character was so different from ours, she said, that. 



THE CASTLE

192
even when you spoke frankly, it was bound to be difficultfor us to believe you ; and if we did not listen to goodadvice we would have to learn to believe you throughbitter experience. Even she with her keen eye for peoplewas almost taken in. But after her last talk with youin the Bridge Inn — I am only repeating her own words— she woke up to your tricks, she said, and after that youcouldn't deceive her even if you did your best to hideyour intentions. But you hid nothing, she repeated thatagain and again, and then she said afterwards : Tryto listen to him carefully at the first favourable oppor-tunity, not superficially, but carefully, carefully. Thatwas all that she had done and your own words had toldher all this regarding myself : That you made up to me— she used those very words — only because I happenedto be in your way, because I did not actually repel you,and because quite erroneously you considered a barmaidthe destined prey of any guest who chose to stretch outhis hand for her. Moreover, you wanted, as the land-lady learned at the Herrenhof, for some reason orother to spend that night at the Herrenhof, and thatcould in no circumstances be achieved except throughme. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to becomemy lover for one night, but something more was neededto turn it into a more serious affair. And that somethingmore was Klamm. The landlady doesn't claim to knowwhat you want from Klamm, she merely maintains thatbefore you knew me you strove as eagerly to reachKlamm as you have done since. The only differencewas this, that before you knew me you were without anyhope, but that now you imagine that in me you have areliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quicklyand even with advantage to yourself. How startledI was — but that was only a superficial fear without


THE CASTLE

193
deeper cause— when you said to-day that before youknew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. 
These might actually be the same words that the land-lady used, she, too, says that it's only since you haveknown me that you've become aware of your goal. 
That’s because you believe you have secured in me asweetheart of Klamm's, and so possess a hostage whichcan only be ransomed at a great price. Your oneendeavour is 1k) treat with Klamm about this hostage. 
As in your eyes I am nothing and the price everything,so you are ready for any concession so far as Tm con-cerned, but as for the price you’re adamant. So it’sa matter of indifference to you that I’ve lost my postat the Herrenhof and that I’ve had to leave the BridgeInn as well, a matter of indifference that I have to endurethe heavy work here in the school. You have no tender-ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me,you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealousnever comes into your mind, my only value for you istliat I was once Klamm’s sweetheart, in your ignoranceyou exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm,so that when the decisive moment comes I should notmake any resistance ; yet at the same time you carryon a feud with the landlady, the only one you thinkcapable of separating me from you, and that’s whyyou brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as tohave to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so faras Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens,you liaven’t the slightest doubt. You think of the inter-view with Klamm as a business deal, a matter of hardcash. You take every possibility into account ; pro-viding that you reach your end you’re ready to do any-thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared togive me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll . 
7


THE CASTLE

194
Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'llfling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ;if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you loveme, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising ’your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact thatyou’re his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him theprotestations of love for him which you know I've made,and beg him to take me on again, of course on yourterms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simplygo and beg from him in the name of K. and wife. But,the landlady said finally, when you see then that youhave deceived yourself in everything, in your assumptionsand in your hopes, in your ideas of Klamm and hisrelations with me, then my purgatory will begin, forthen for the first time I'll be in reality the only posses-sion you'll have to fall back on, but at the same time itwill be a possession that has proved to be worthless, andyou'll treat it accordingly, seeing that you hgive nofeeling for me but the feeling of ownership."
With his lips tightly compressed K. had listened in-tently, the wood he was sitting on had rolled asunderthough he had not noticed it, he had almost slid on tothe floor, and now at last he got up, sat down on thedais, took Frieda’s hand, which she feebly tried to pullaway, and said : " In what you've said I haven'talways been able to distinguish the landlady's senti-ments from your own." " They're the landlady'ssentiments purely," said Frieda, " I heard her outbecause I respected her, but it was the first time in mylife that I completely and wholly refused to accept heropinion. All that she said seemed to me so pitiful, sofar from any understanding of how things stood betweenus. There seemed actually to be more truth to me inthe direct opposite of what she said. I thought of that

H


THE CASTLE

*95
sad morning after our first night together. You kneelingbeside me with a look as if every^ing were lost. Andhow it really seemed then that in spile of all I coulddo, I was not helping you but hindering you. It wasthrough me that the landlady had become your enemy,a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under-value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought,that you had to fight for your post, that you were at adisadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you hadto humble yourself before the teacher and were de-livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for mysake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. 
That you still went on trying to reach Klamm wasonly a kind of feeble endeavour to propitiate him insome way. And I told myself that the landlady, whocertainly knew far better than I, was only trying toshield me by her suggestions from bitter self-reproach. 
A well-meant but superfluous attempt. My love foryou had helped me through everything, and wouldcertainly help you on too, in the long run, if not herein the village, then somewhere else ; it had alreadygiven a proof of its power, it had rescued you fromBarnabas's family." " That was your opinion, then,at the time," said K., "and has it changed since?"" I don't know," replied Frieda, glancing down at K.'shand which still held hers, " perhaps nothing haschanged ; when you're so close to me and question meso c^mly, then I think that nothing has changed. Butin reality " — she drew her hand away from K., saterect opposite him and wept without hiding her face;she held her tear-covered face up to him as if she wereweeping not for herself and so had nothing to hide,but as if she were weeping over K.'s treachery and sothe pain of seeing her tears was his due — " But h


THE CASTLE

196
reality everything has changed since I’ve listened toyou talking vv^ith that boy. How innocently you beganasking about the family, about this and that 1 To meyou looked just as you did that night when you cameinto the taproom, impetuous and frank, trying to catchmy attention with such a childlike eagerness. Youwere just the same as then, and all I wished was thatthe landlady had been here and could have listened toyou, and then we should h^ve seen whether she couldstill stick to her opinion. But then quite suddenly — Idon’t know how it happened — noticed that you weretalking to him with a hidden intention. You won histrust — and it wasn’t easy to win — by sympathetic words,simply so that you might with greater ease reach yourend, which I began to recognise more and more clearly. 
Your end was that woman. In your apparentlysolicitous enquiries about her I could see quite nakedlyyour simple preoccupation with your own affairs. Youwere betraying that woman even before you had wonher. In your words I recognised not only my past,but my future as well, it was as if the landlady weresitting beside me and explaining everything, and withall my strength I tried to push her away, but I sawclearly the hopelessness of my attempt, and yet it wasnot really myself who was going to be betrayed, it wasnot I who was really being betrayed, but that unknownwoman. And then when I collected myself and askedHans what he wanted to be and he said he wanted tobe like you, and I saw that he had fallen under yourinfluence so completely already, well what great differ-ence was there between him, being exploited here by you,the poor boy, and myself that time in the taproom ? ”
“ Everything,” said K., who had regained his com-posure in listening. ” Everything that you say is in a


THE CASTLE

197
certain sense justifiable, it is not untrue, it is onlypartisan. These are the landlady's ideas, my enemy'sideas, even if you imagine that they're your own ; andthat comforts me. But they're instructive, one can learna great deal from the landlady. She didn't expressthem to me personally, although she did not spare myfeelings in other ways ; evidently she put this weaponin your hands in the hope that you would employ itat a particulatly bad or decisive point for me. If I amabusing you, then she is abusing you in the same way. 
But, Frieda, just consider ; even if everything were justas the landlady says, it would only be shameful on onesupposition, that is, that you did not love me. Then,only then, would it really seem that I had won youthrough calculation and trickery, so as to profiteer bypossessing you. In that case it might even have beenpart of my plan to appear before you arm-in-arm withOlga so as to evoke your pity, and the landlady hassimply forgotten to mention that too in her list of myoffences. But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn'ta sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but youcame to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and wefound one another without a thought for ourselves, inthat case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look ? Ifthat were really so, in acting for myself I was actingfor you too, there is no distinction here, and only anenemy could draw it. And that holds in everything,even in the case of Hans. Besides, in your condemna-tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes youexaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions andmy own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by anymeans amount to an actual antagonism between them,moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, ifyou believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious


THE CASTLE

198
little man, and even if they should have been all lost ohim, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope."
It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Friedwith a sigh. '' I certainly had no doubts about yoiand if I have acquired something of the kind from tllandlady, I'll be only too glad to throw it off and beyou for forgiveness on my knees, as I do, believe mall the time, even when I'm saying such horrible thingBut the truth remains that you keep man^ things fro:me ; you come and go, I don't know where or fro:where. Just now when Hans knocked you cried 01Barnabas's name. I only wish you had once call(out my name as lovingly as for some incomprehensibreason you called that hateful name. If you have 1trust in me, how can I keep mistrust from rising ?delivers me completely to the landlady, whom yjustify in appearance by your behaviour. Not in everthing, I won't say that you justify her in everythirfor was it not on my account alone that you sent tassistants packing ? Oh, if you but knew with wlpassion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself inthat you do and say, even when it gives me pair" Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal 1the slightest thing from you. See how the landlahates me, and how she does her best to get you avfrom me, and what despicable means she uses, and hyou give in to her, Frieda, how you give in to h<Tell me, now, in what way do I hide anything fryou ? That I want to reach Klamm you know, tyou can’t help me to do it and that accordingly I mdo it by my own efforts you know too ; that I hnot succeeded up till now you see for yourself. AiCO humiliate myself doubly, perhaps, by telling youall the bootless attempts which have already humilis


THE CASTLE

199
me sufficiently? Am I to plume myself on havingwaited and shivered in vain all an afternoon at the doorof Klamm's sledge? Only too glad not to have tothink of such things any more, I hurry back to you,and I am greeted again with all those reproaches fromyou. And Barnabas ? It's true Tm waiting for him. 
He's Klamm's messenger, it isn't I who made himthat." " Barnabas again ! " cried Frieda. " I can'tbelieve that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you'reright," said K., " but he's the only messenger that'ssent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda,“ all the more reason why you should beware of him."" Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that tillnow," said K. smiling. " He comes very seldom, andwhat messages he brings are of no importance ; onlythe fact that they come from Klamm gives them anyvalue." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is noteven Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis-turbs me most of all ; that you always longed forKlamm while you had me was bad enough, but thatyou seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm nowIS much worse, that's something which not even thelandlady foresaw. According to the landlady yourhappiness, a questionable and yet very real happiness,would end on the day when you finally recognised thatthe hopes you founded on Klamm were in vain. Butnow you don't wait any longer even for that day, ayoung lad suddenly comes in and you begin to fightwith him for his mother, as if you were fighting for yourvery life." " You've understood my talk with Hansquite correctly," said K., " it was really so. But is yourwhole former life so completely wiped from your mind(all except the landlady, of course, who won't allowherself to be wiped out), that you can't remember any


200

THE CASTLE

longer how one must fight to get to the top, especiallywhen one begins at the bottom ? How one must takeadvantage of everything that offers any hope whatever ?And this woman comes from the Castle, she told meherself on my first day here, when I happened to strayinto Lasemann's. What's more natural than to askher for advice or even for help ; if the landlady onlyknows the obstacles which keep one from reachingKlamm, then this woman •'probably knof/s the way tohim, for she has come here by that way herself." " Theway to Klamm ? " asked Frieda. " To Klamm,certainly, where else ? " said K. Then he jumped up :" But now it's high time I was going for the lunch."Frieda implored him to stay, urgently, with an eager-ness quite disproportionate to the occasion, as if onl)'his staying with her would confirm all the comfort-ing things he had told her. But K. was thinking ofthe teacher, he pointed towards the door, which anymoment might fly open with a thunderous crash, andpromised to return at once, she was not even to lightthe fire, he himself would see about it. Finally Friedagave in in silence. As K. was stamping through thesnow outside — the path should have been shovelled freelong ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for-ward ! — he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired,still holding to the railings. Only one, where was theother ? Had K. broken the endurance of one of them,then, at least ? The remaining one was certainly stillzealous enough, one could see that when, animated jpythe sight of K., he began more feverishly than ever tostretch out his arms and roll his eyes. " His obstinacyis really wonderful," K. told himself, but had to add," he’ll freeze to the railings if he keeps it up." Out-wardly, however, K. had nothing for the assistant but


THE CASTLE

201

a threatening gesture with his fist, which preventedany nearer approach ; indeed the assistant actuallyretreated for an appreciable distance. Just then Friedaopened one of the windows so as to air the room beforeputting on the fire, as she had promised K. Immedi-ately the assistant turned his attention from K., andcrept as if irresistibly attracted to the window. Herface tom between pity for the assistant and a beseechinghelpless glance which she 1:ast at K., Frieda put herhand out hesitatingly from the window, it was not clearwhether it was a greeting or a command to go away,nor did the assistant let it deflect him from his resolveto come nearer. Then Frieda closed the outer windowhastily, but remained standing behind it, her hand on thesash, with her head bent sidewards, her eyes wide, and afixed smile on her face. Did she know that standing likethat she was more likely to attract the assistant than repelhim ? But K. did not look back again, he thought hehad better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. 


XIV
A t long last, late in the afternoon, when it wasalready dark, K. had cleared the garden path,piled the snow high on either side, beaten it downhard, and also accomplished his work for the day. 
He was standing by the garden gate in the middle ofa wide solitude. He had driven off the remainingassistant hours before, and chased him a long way, butthe fellow had managed to hide himself somewherebetween the garden and the school house and could notbe found, nor had he shown himself since. Frieda was


202

THE CASTLE

indoors either starting to wash clothes or still washingGisa*s cat ; it was a sign of great confidence on Gisa'spart that this task had been entrusted to Frieda, anunpleasant and uncalled-for task, indeed, which K. 
would not have suffered her to attempt had it not beenadvisable in view of their various shortcomings to seizeevery opportunity of securing Gisa's goodwill. Gisa hadlooked on approvingly while K. brought down thelittle children's bath from the garret, heated water, andfinally helped to put the cat carefully into the bath. Thenshe actually left the cat entirely in charge of Frieda, forSchwarzer, K.'s acquaintance of the first evening,had arrived, had greeted K. with a mixture of em-barrassment (arising out of the events of that evening)and of unmitigated contempt such as one accordsto a debtor, and had vanished with Gisa into theother schoolroom. The two of them were still there. 
Schwarzer, K. had been told in the Bridge Inn, hadbeen living in the village for some time, although hewas a castellan's son, because of his love for Gisa, andthrough his influential connections had got himselfappointed as a pupil-teacher, a position which he filledchiefly by attending all Gisa's classes, either sittingon a school bench among the children, or preferablyat Gisa's feet on the teacher's dais. His presence wasno longer a disturbance, the children had got quite usedto it, all the more easily, perhaps, because Schwarzerneither liked nor understood children and rarely spoketo them except when he took over the gymnastic lessqpfrom Gisa, and was content merely to breathe the sameair as Gisa and bask in her warmth and nearness. 

The only astonishing thing about it was that in theBridge Inn at least Schwarzer was spoken of with acertain degree of respect, even if his actions were


THE CASTLE

203
ridiculous rather than praiseworthy, and that Gisa wasincluded in this respectful atmosphere. It was nonethe less unwarranted of Schwarzer to assume that hisposition as a pupil- teacher gave him a great superiorityover K., for this superiority was non-existent. A schooljanitor was an important person to the rest of the staff—and should have been especially so to such an assistantas Schwarzer — a person not to be lightly despised, whoshould at lea^ be suitably •conciliated if professionalconsiderations were not enough to prevent one fromdespising him. K. decided to keep this fact in mind,also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account oftheir first evening, a debt which had not been lessenedby the way in which events of succeeding days hadseemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. For itmust not be forgotten that this reception had perhapsdetermined the later course of events. Because ofSchwarzer the full attention of the authorities had beenmost unreasonably directed to K. at the very first hour ofhis arrival, while he was still a complete stranger in thevillage without a single acquaintance or an alternativeshelter ; over-tired with walking as he was and quitehelpless on his sack of straw, he had been at the mercyof any official action. One night later might havemade all the difference, things might have gone quietlyand been only half noticed. At any rate nobodywould have known anything about him or have hadany suspicions, there would have been no hesitation inaccepting him at least for one day as a stray wanderer,his handiness and trustworthiness would have beenrecognised and spoken of in the neighbourhood, andprobably he would soon have found accommodationsomewhere as a servant. Of course the authoritieswould have found him out. But there would have been


THE CASTLE

204
a big difference between having the Central Bureau,or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on hisaccount in the middle of the night by an insistentalthough ostensibly humble request for an immediatedecision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probablynot in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. tothe Superintendent on the next day during official hoursto report himself in proper form as a wandering strangerwho had already found qifarters in a respectable house,and who would probably be leaving the place inanother day's time unless the unlikely were to happenand he found some work in the village, only for a dayor two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 
That, or something like that, was what would havehappened had it not been for Schwarzer. Theauthorities would have pursued the matter further,but calmly, in the ordinary course of business, un-harassed by what they probably hated most, the im-patience of a waiting client. Well, all that was not K.'sfault, it was Schwarzer's fault, but Schwarzer was theson of a castellan, and had behaved with outwardpropriety, and so the matter could only be visited onK.'s head. And what was the trivial cause of it all ?Perhaps an ungracious mood of Gisa's that day, whichmade Schwarzer roam sleeplessly all night, and venthis annoyance on K. Of course on the other hand onecould argue that Schwarzer's attitude was somethingK. had to be thankful for. It had been the sole pre-cipitant of a situation K. would never by himself h^veachieved, nor have dared to achieve, and which theauthorities themselves would hardly have allowed,namely, that from the very beginning without anydissimulation he found himself confronting the authori-ties face to face, in so far as that was at all possible. 



THE CASTLE

205
Still, that was a dubious gift, it spared K. indeed thenecessity of lying and contriving, but it made himalmost defenceless, handicapped him anyhow in thestruggle, and might have driven him to despair had henot been able to remind himself that the difference instrength between the authorities and himself was soenormous that all the guile of which he was capablewould hardly have served appreciably to reduce thedifference in his favour. Yet that was only a reflectionfor his own consolation, Schwarzer was none the lessin his debt, and having harmed K. then could be calledupon now to help. K. would be in need of help in thequite trivial and tentative opening moves, for Barnabasseemed to have failed him again. 

On Frieda's account K. had refrained all day fromgoing to Barnabas's house to make enquiries ; inorder to avoid receiving Barnabas in Frieda's presencehe had laboured out of doors, and when his work wasdone had continued to linger outside in expectation ofBarnabas, but Barnabas had not come. The onlything he could do now was to visit the sisters, only for aminute or two, he would only stand at the door andask, he would be back again soon. So he thrust theshovel into the snow and set off at a run. He arrivedbreathless at the house of Barnabas, and after a sharpknock flung the door open and asked, without lookingto see who was inside : ** Hasn't Barnabas come backyet ? " Only then did he notice that Olga was notthere, that the two old people, who were again sittingat the far end of the table in a state of vacancy, had notyet realised what was happening at the door and wereonly now slowly turning their faces towards it, andfinally that Amalia had been lying beside the stove under1 blanket and in her alarm at K.'s sudden appearance


THE CASTLE

206
had started up with her hand to her brow in an cfiFortto recover her composure. If Olga had been there shewould have answered immediately, and K. could havegone away again, but as it was he had at least to takea step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand whichshe pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startledold folks from attempting to meander through theroom, which she did with a few words. K. learned thatOlga was chopping wooci in the yard,*- that Amalia,exhausted — for what reason she did not say — had hadto lie down a short time before, and that Barnabas hadnot yet indeed returned, but must return very soon,for he never stayed overnight in the Castle. K. thankedher for the information, which left him at liberty to go,but Amalia asked if he would not wait to see Olga. 
However, she added, he had already spoken to Olgaduring the day. He answered with surprise that hehad not, and asked if Olga had something of particularimportance to say to him. As if faintly irritatedAmalia screwed up her mouth silently, gave him anod, obviously in farewell, and lay down again. Fromher rccuinbeni position she iec her eyes resc on himas if she were astonished to see him still there. Hergaze was cold, clear, and steady as usual, it was neverlevelled exactly on the object she regarded but in somedisturbing way always a little past it, hardly perceptibly,but yet unquestionably past it, not from weakness,apparently, nor from embarrassment, nor from duplicity,but from a persistent and dominating desire for isola-tion, which she herself perhaps only became consciousof in this way. K. thought he could remember beingbaffled on the very first evening by that look, probablyeven the whole hatefulness of the impression so quicklymade on him by this family was traceable to that look. 



THE CASTLE

207
which in itself was not hateful but proud and uprightin its reserve. " You are always so sad, Amalia,*' saidK., ‘'is anything troubling you ? Can't you say whatit is ? I have never seen a country girl at all like you. 
It never struck me before. Do you really belong tothis village ? Were you born here ? " Amalia nodded,as if K. had only put the last of those questions, andthen said: “So you'll wait for Olga?" “I don'tknow why you keep on asking me that," said K. “Ican't stay any longer because my fiancee's waiting forme at home." Amalia propped herself on one elbow ;she had not heard of the engagement. K. gave Frieda'sname. Amalia did not know it. She asked if Olgaknew of their betrothal. K. fancied she did, for shehad seen him with Frieda, and news like that wasquick to fly round in a village. Amalia assured him,however, that Olga knew nothing about it, and thatit would make her very unhappy, for she seemed to bein love with K. She had not directly said so, for shewas very reserved, but love betrayed itself involuntarily. 
K. was convinced that Amalia was mistaken. Amaliasmiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up hergloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange-ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guardedhitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealedagain, but never so completely. Amalia said that shewas certainly not mistaken, she would even go furtherand afiirm that K., too, had an inclination for Olga,and that his visits, which were ostensibly concernedwith some message or other from Barnabas, were reallyintended for Olga. But now that Amalia knew allabout it he need not be so strict with himself and couldcome oftener to see them. That was all she wantedto say. K. shook his head, and reminded her of hi


THE CASTLE

208
betrothal. Amalia seemed to set little store by thisbetrothal, the immediate impression she received fromK., who was after all unaccompanied, was in her opiniondecisive, she only asked when K. had made the girl'sacquaintance, for he had been but a few days in thevillage. K. told her about his night at the Herrenhof,whereupon Amalia merely said briefly that she hadbeen very much against his being taken to the Herrenhof. 

She appealed for confirmation to Olga, v'ho had justcome in with an armful of wood, fresh and glowingfrom the frosty air, strong and vivid, as if transformedby the change from her usual aimless standing aboutinside. She threw down the wood, greeted K. frankly,and asked at once after Frieda. K. exchanged a lookwith Amalia, who seemed, however, not at all discon-certed. A little relieved, K. spoke of Frieda morefreely than he would otherwise have done, describedthe difficult circumstances in which she was managingto keep house in a kind of way in the school, and inthe haste of his narrative — for he wanted to go homeat once — so far forgot himself when bidding themgood-bye as to invite the sisters to come and pay hima visit. He began to stammer in confusion, however,when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word,interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; thenOlga was compelled to associate herself with it. ButK., still harassed by the feeling that he ought to go atonce, and becoming uneasy under Amalia's gaze, didnot hesitate any longer to confess that the invitationhad been quite unpremeditated and had sprung merelyfrom a personal impulse, but that unfortunately hecould not confirm it since there was a great hostility,to him quite incomprehensible, between Frieda andtheir family. “ It's not hostility," said Amalia, getting


THE CASTLE

209
up from her couch and flinging the blanket behindher, it's nothing so big as that, it's only a parrotrepetition of what she hears everywhere. And now, goaway, go to your young woman, I can see you're in ahurry. You needn't be afraid that we'll come, I onlysaid it at first for fun, out of mischief. But you cancome often enough to see us, there's nothing to hinderyou, you can always plead Barnabas's messages as anexcuse. I'll^make it easier, for you by telling you thatBarnabas, even if he has a message from the Castle foryou, can't go all the way up to the school to find you. 
He can't trail about so much, poor boy, he wearshimself out in the service, you'll have to come yourselfto get the news." K. had never before heard Amaliautter so many consecutive sentences, and they soundeddifferently from her usual comments, they had a kindof dignity which obviously impressed not only K. butOlga too, although she was accustomed to her sister. 
She stood a little to one side, her arms folded, in herusual stolid and somewhat stooping posture once more,with her eyes fixed on Amalia, who on the other handlooked only at K. " It's an error," said K., " a grosserror to imagine that I'm not in earnest in looking forBarnabas, it's my most urgent wish, really my onlywish, to get my business with the authorities properlysettled. And Barnabas has to help me in that, mostof my hopes are based on him. I grant he has dis-appointed me greatly once as it is, but that was moremy fault than his ; in the bewilderment of my firsthours in the village I believed that everything could besettled by a short walk in the evening, and when theimpossible proved impossible I blamed him for it. 
That influenced me even in my opinion of your familyand of you. But that is all past, I think I understand


210

THE CASTLE

you better now, you are even '' K* tried to think
of the exact word, but could not find it immediately,so contented himself with a makeshift — ** You seem tobe the most good-natured people in the village so faras my experience goes. But now, Amalia, you'reputting me off the track again by your depreciation —if not of your brother's service — ^then of the importancehe has for me. Perhaps you aren't acquainted withhis affairs, in which case it doesn't matter< but perhapsyou are acquainted with them — and that's the impres-sion I incline to have — in which case it's a bad thing,for that would indicate that your brother is deceivingme." “ Calm yourself," said Amalia, " I'm notacquainted with them, nothing could induce me tobecome acquainted with them, nothing at all, not evenmy consideration for you, which would move me to doa great deal, for, as you say, we are good-natured people. 
But my brother's affairs are his own business, I knownothing about them except what I hear by chance now andthen against my will. On the other hand Olga can tell youall about them, for she's in his confidence." And Amaliawent away, first to her parents, with whom shewhispered, then to the kitchen ; she went without takingleave of K., as if she knew that he would stay for along time yet and that no good-bye was necessary. 


XV
S EEING that with a somewhat astonished face K. 

remained standing where he was, Olga laughedat him and drew him towards the settle by the stove, sheseemed to be really happy at the prospect of sitting there


THE CASTLE

211

alone with him, but it was a contented happiness withouta single hint of jealousy. And precisely this freedomof hers from jealousy and therefore from any kind ofclaim upon him did K. good, he was glad to look intoher blue eyes which were not cajoling, nor hectoring,but shyly simple and frank. It was as if the warningof Frieda and the landlady had made him, not moresusceptible to all those things, but more observant andmore discerning. And h«# laughed with Olga when sheexpressed her wonder at his calling Amalia good-natured,of all things, for Amalia had many qualities, but good-nature was certainly not one of them. Whereupon K. 
explained that of course his praise had been meant forOlga, only Amalia was so masterful that she not onlytook to herself whatever was said in her presence, butinduced other people of their own free will to inclndcher in everything. ** That's true," said Olga, becomingmore serious, " truer than you think. Amalia's youngerthan me, and younger than Barnabas, but hers is thedecisive voice in the family for good or for ill, of courseshe bears the burden of it more than anybody, the goodas well as the bad." K. thought that an exaggeration,for Amalia had just said that she paid no attention, forinstance, to her brother's affairs, while Olga knew allabout them. " How can I make it clear ? " said Olga," Amalia bothers neither about Barnabas nor about me,she really bothers about nobody but the old peoplewhom she tends day and night ; now she has just asked^ them again if they want anything and has gone intothe kitchen to cook them something, and for their sakesshe has overcome her indisposition, for she's been illsince midday and been lying here on the settle. Butalthough she doesn't bother about us we're as dependenton her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise


212

THE CASTLE

us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice,only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. You haveexperience of people, you come from a strange land,don't you think, too, that she's extraordinarily clever ? "‘'Extraordinarily unhappy is what she seems to me,"j»aid K., " but how does it go with your respect for herchat Barnabas, for example, takes service as a messenger,in spite of Amalia's evident disapproval, and even herscorn ? " " If he knew wha^else to do he* would give
up being a messenger at once, for it doesn't satisfy him."" Isn't he an expert shoemaker ? " asked K. " Of coursehe is," said Olga, " and in his spare time he does workfor Brunswick, and if he liked he could have enoughwork to keep him going day and night and earn a lotof money." " Well then," said K., " that would bean alternative to his service as a messenger." " Analternative ? " asked Olga in astonishment. " Do youthink he does it for the money ? " " Maybe he does,"
said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented ? "" He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga," but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service,at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K.," do you even doubt that ? " "Well," said Olga, " notreally, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is acceptedby the attendants as one of themselves, he sees variousolficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela-tively important letters, even with verbally deliveredmessages, that's a good deal, after all, and we shouldbe proud of what he has achieved for a young man ofhis years." K. nodded and no longer thought of goinghome. " He has a uniform of his own, too ? " he asked. 
"You mean the jacket ? " said Olga. " No, Amalia madethat for him long before he became a messenger. Butyou're touching on a sore spot now. He ought long ago


the castle

21 }
to have had, not a uniform, for there aren’t many in theCastle, but a suit provided by the department, and hehas been promised one, but in things of that kind theCastle moves slowly, and the worst of it is that one neverknows what this slowness means ; it can mean that thematter’s being considered, but it can also mean thatit hasn’t yet been taken up, that Barnabas for instanceis still on probation, and in the long run it can alsomean that tfie whole thing^as been settled, that for somereason or other the promise has been cancelled, and thatBarnabas will never get his suit. One can never findout exactly what is happening, or only a long time after-wards. We have a saying here, perhaps you’ve heardit : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.” ” That’sa good observation,” said K., he took it still more seri-ously than Olga, ” a good observation, and the decisionsmay have other characteristics in common with younggirls.” ” Perhaps,” said Olga. ” But as far as theofficial suit’s concerned, that’s one of Barnabas’s greatsorrows, and since we share all our troubles, it's one ofmine too. We ask ourselves in vain why he doesn't getan official suit. But the whole aflFair is not just so simpleas that. The officials, for instance, apparently have noofficial dress ; so far as we know here, and so far asBarnabas tells us, the officials go about in their ordinaryclothes, very fine clothes, certainly. Well, you’ve seenKlamm. Now, Barnabas is certainly not an official, noteven one in the lowest category, and he doesn’t overstep, his limitations so far as to want to be one. But accordingto Barnabas, the higher-grade servants, whom one cer-tainly never sees down here in the village, have no officialdress ; that's a kind of comfort, one might suppose, butit’s a deceptive comfort, for is Barnabas a high-gradeservant ? Not he ; however partial one might be


THE CASTLE

214
towards him one couldn't maintain that, the fact thathe comes to the village and even lives here is sufficientproof of the contrary, for the higher-grade servants arceven more inaccessible than the officials, perhaps rightlyso, perhaps they are even of higher rank than many anofficial, there's some evidence of that, they work less,and Barnabas says it's a marvellous sight to see thesetall and distinguished men slowly walking through thecorridors, Barnabas always give them a wide berth. 
Well, he might be one of the lower-grade servants, then,but these always have an official suit, at least wheneverthey come down into the village, it's not exactly a uni-form, there are many different versions of it, but at anyrate one can always tell Castle servants by their clothes,you've seen some of them in the Herrenhof. The mostnoticeable thing about the clothes is that they're mostlyclose-fitting, a peasant or a handworker couldn't dowith them. Well, a suit like that hasn't been given toBarnabas and it's not merely the shame of it or thedisgrace — one could put up with that — but the fact thatin moments of depression — and we often have suchmoments, none too rarely, Barnabas and I — it makesus doubt everything. Is it really Castle service Barnabasis doing, we ask ourselves then ; granted, he goes intothe bureaux, but are the bureaux part of the real Castle 7And even if there are bureaux actually in the Castle, arethc^ the bureaux that Barnabas is allowed to enter ?
He's admitted into certain rooms, but they're onlya part of the whole, for there are barriers behind whichthere are more rooms. Not that he's actually forbiddento pass the barriers, but he can't very well push pastthem once he has met his chiefs and been dismissed bythem. Besides, everybody is watched there, at least sowc believe. And even if he did push on farther what


THH CASTLE

215
good would it be to him, if he had no official duties tocarry out and were a mere intruder ? And you mustn'timagine that these barriers are a definite dividing-line ;Barnabas is always impressing that on me. There arebarriers even at the entrance to the rooms where he'sadmitted, so you see there are barriers he can pass,and they're just the same as the ones he's never yetpassed, which looks as if one oughtn't to suppose thatbehind the • ultimate barders the bureaux are anydifferent from those Barnabas has already seen. Onlythat's what we do suppose in moments of depression. 
And the doubt doesn't stop there, we can’t keep itwithin bounds. Barnabas sees officials, Barnabas isgiven messages. But who are those officials, and whatare the messages ? Now, so he says, he's assigned toKlamm, who gives him his instructions in person. Well,that would be a great favour, even higher-gradeservants don't get so far as that, it’s almost too muchto believe, almost terrifying. Only think, directlyassigned to Klamm, speaking with him face to face !But is it really the case ? Well, suppose it is so, thenwhy does Barnabas doubt that the official who isreferred to as Klamm is really Klamm ? " “ Olga,"
said K., ** you surely must be joking ; how can therebe any doubt about Klamm's appearance, everybodyknows what he looks like, even I have seen him." " Ofcourse not, K.," said Olga. " I'm not joking at all. 
I'm desperately serious. Yet I'm not telling you allthis simply to telieve my own feelings and burden yours,but because Amalia charged me to tell you, since youwere asking for Barnabas, and because I think too thatit would be useful for you to know more about it. 
I'm doing it for Barnabas's sake as well, so that youwon't pin too many hopes upon him, and suffer dis-


THE CASTLE

216
appointment, and make him suflFer too because of yourdisappointment. He's very sensitive, for instance hedidn't sleep all night because you were displeased withhim yesterday evening. He took you to say that itwas a bad lookout for you to have orJy a messengerlike him. These words kept him oflF his sleep. I don'tsuppose that you noticed how upset he was, for Castlemessengers must keep themselves well under control. 
But he hasn't an easy time, flot even with you, althoughfrom your point of view you don't ask too much of him,for you have your own prior conception of a messenger'spowers and make your demands accordingly. But inthe Castle they have a different conception of amessenger's duties, which couldn't be reconciled withyrours, even if Barnabas were to devote himself entirelyto the task, which, unfortunately, he often seems in-clined to do. Still, one would have to submit to thatand raise no objections if it weren't for the questionwhether Barnabas is really a messenger or not. Beforeyou, of course, he can't express any doubt of it what-ever, to do that would be to undermine his very existenceand to offend grievously against laws which he believeshimself still plighted to, and even to me he doesn'tspeak freely, I have to cajole and kiss his doubts out ofhim, and even then he refuses to admit that his doubtsare doubts. He has something of Amalia in him. AndI'm sure that he doesn't tell me everything, althoughI'm his sole confidante. But we do often speak aboutKlamm, whom I've never seen ; you know Fried^doesn't like me and has never let me look at him,still his appearance is well known in the village, somepeople have seen him, everybody has heard of him, andout of glimpses and rumours and through various dis-torting factors an image of Klamm has been construcced


THE CASTLE

217
which is certainly true in fundamentals. But only infundamentals. In detail it fluctuates, and yet perhapsnot so much as Klamm's real appearance. For he'sreported as having one appearance when he comesinto the village and another on leaving it ; after havinghis beer he looks different from what he does before it,when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep,when he's alone he's different from when he's talkingto people, and — what is ccJtnprehensible after all that —he's almost another person up in the Castle. And evenwithin the village there are considerable differences inthe accounts given of him, differences as to his height,his bearing, his size, and the cut of his beard ; fortun-ately there's one thing in which all the accounts agree,he always wears the same clothes, a black morning coatwith long tails. Now of course all these differencesaren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ;they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degreeof his excitement, on the countless graduations of hopeor despair which are possible for him when he seesKlamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm onlyfor a second or two. I'm telling you all this just asBarnabas has often told it to me, and, on the whole,for anyone not personally interested in the matter, itwould be a sufficient explanation. Not for us, how-ever ; it's a matter of life or death for Barnabas whetherit's really Klamm he speaks to or not." " And for meno less," said K., and they moved nearer to each otherpn the settle. 

All this depressing information of Olga's certainlyaffected K., but he regarded it as a great consolationto find other people who were at least externally muchin the same situation as himself, with whom he couldjoin forces and whom he could touch at many points. 



2i8

THE CASTLE

not merely at a few points as in Frieda's case. He wasindeed gradually giving up all hope of achieving successthrough Barnabas, but the worse it went with Barnabasin the Castle the nearer he felt drawn to him downhere ; never would K. have believed that in the villageitself such a despairing struggle could go on as Barnabasand his sister were involved in. Of course it was as yetfar from being adequately explained and might turnout to be quite the reverse^• one shouldn'^ let Olga'sunquestionable innocence mislead one into takingBarnabas's uprightness for granted. " Barnabas isfamiliar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear-ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compareda great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klammonce through a carriage window in the village, orbelieved he saw him, and so was sufficiently preparedto recognise him again, and yet — how can you explainthis ? — when he entered a bureau in the Castle and hadone of several officials pointed out to him as Klammhe didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwardscouldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. 
But if you ask Barnabas what was the difference betweenthat Klamm and the usual description given of Klamm,he can’t tell you, or rather he tries to tell you anddescribes the official of the Castle, but his descriptioncoincides exactly with the descriptions we usually hearof Klamm. Well then, Barnabas, I say to him, whydo you doubt it, why do you torment yourself ? Where-upon in obvious distress he begins to reckon up certaincharacteristics of the Castle official, but he seems tobe thinking them out rather than describing them, andbesides that they are so trivial — a particular way ofnodding the head, for instance, or even an unbuttonedwaistcoat — that one simply can't take them seriously. 



THE CASTLE

219
Much more important seems to me tlie way in whichKlamm receives Barnabas. Barnabas has often de-scribed it to me, and even sketched the room. He'susually admitted into a large room, but the room isn'tKlamm's bureau, nor even the bureau of any particularofEcial. It's a room divided into two by a singlereading-desk stretching all its length from wall to wall ;one side is so narrow that two people can hardly squeezepast each other, and that's* reserved for the officials,the other side is spacious, and that's where clients wait,spectators, servants, messengers. On the desk thereare great books lying open, side by side, and officialsstand by, most of them reading. They don't alwaysstick to the same book, yet it isn't the books that theychange but their places, and it always astounds Barnabasto see how they have to squeeze past each other whenthey change places, because there's so little room. Infront of tlie desk and close to it there are small, lowtables at which clerks sit ready to write from dictation,whenever the officials wish it. And the way that isdone always amazes Barnabas. There's no expresscommand given by the official, nor is the dictationgiven in a loud voice, one could hardly tell that it wasbeing given at all, the official just seems to go on readingas before, only whispering as he reads, and the clerkhears the whisper. Often it's so low that the clerkcan't hear it at all in his seat, and then he has to jumpup, catch what's being dictated, sit down again quicklyapd make a note of it, then jump up once more, andso on. What a strange business ! It's almost incom-prehensible. Of course Barnabas has time enough toobserve it all, for he's often kept standing in the bigroom for hours and days at a time before Klammhappens to see him. And even if Klamm sees him and


220

THE CASTLE

he springs to attention, that needn't mean anything,for Klamm may turn away from him again to the bookand forget all about him. That often happens. Butwhat can be the use of a messenger-service so casualas that ? It makes me quite doleful to hear Barnabassay in the early morning that he's going to the Castle. 
In all likelihood a quite useless journey, a lost day, acompletely vain hope. What's the good of it all ?And here's cobbler's work piled up which never getsdone and which Brunswick is always asking for." " Oh,well," said K., " Barnabas has just to hang on till hegets a commission. That's understandable, the placeseems to be over-staffed, and everybody can't be givena job every day, you needn't complain about that, forit must affect everybody. But in the long run even aBarnabas gets commissions, he has brought two lettersalready to me." " It's possible, of course," answeredOlga, " that we're wrong in complaining, especially agirl like me who knows things only from hearsay andcan't understand it all so well as Barnabas, who certainlykeeps many things to himself. But let me tell youhow the letters are given out, your letters, for example. 
Barnabas doesn't get these letters directly from Klamm,but from a clerk. On no particular day, at no par-ticular hour — that's why the service, however easy itappears, is really very exhausting, for Barnabas mustbe always on the alert — a clerk suddenly remembersabout him and gives him a sign, without any apparentinstructions from Klamm, who merely goes on readii;)gin his book. True, sometimes Klamm is polishing hisglasses when Barnabas comes up, but he often doesthat, anyhow — however, he may take a look at Barnabasthen, supposing, that is, that he can see anything at allwithout his glasses, which Barnabas doubts ; for


THE CASTLE

221

Klamm's eyes are almost shut, he generally seems to besleeping and only polishing his glasses in a kind ofdream. Meanwhile the clerk hunts among the pilesof manuscripts and writings under his table and fishesout a letter for you, so it's not a letter newly written,indeed, by the look of the envelope, it's usually a veryold letter, which has been lying there a long time. 
But if that is so, why do they keep Barnabas waitinglike that ? And you too ? • And the letter too, ofcourse, for it must be long out of date. That's howthey get Barnabas the reputation of being a bad andslow messenger. It's all very well for the clerk, he justgives Barnabas the letter, saying : ' From Klamm forR. ' and so dismisses him. But Barnabas comes liomebreathless, with his hardly won letter next to his bareskin, and then we sit here on the settle like this and hetells me about it and we go into all the particulars andweigh up what he has achieved and find ultimatelythat it's very little, and questionable at that untilBarnabas lays the letter down with no longer anyinclination to deliver it, yet doesn't feel inclined to goto sleep either, and so sits cobbling on his stool allnight. That's how it is, K., and now you have all mysecrets and you can't be surprised any longer at Amalia sindifference to them." " And what happens to theletter ? " asked K. " The letter ? " said Olga. Oh,some time later when I've plagued Barnab^ enoughabout it, it may be days or weeks later, he picks it upag^in and goes to deliver it. In such practical mattershe’s very dependent on me. For I can usually pullmyself together after I've recovered from the first im-pression of what he has told me, but he can t, proba ybecause he knows more. So I always find somethingor other to say to him, such as ' What are you really


THE CASTLE

22 ^
aiming at, Barnabas ? What kind of career, whaambition arc you dreaming of? Are you thinking aclimbing so high that you'll have to leave us, to leav(me, completely behind you ? Is that what you'naiming at ? How can I help believing so whe^ it*?the only possible explanation why you're so dreadfullydiscontented with all you've done ^ready ? Only takea look round and see whether any of our neighbounhas got on so well as you. I admit their situation isdifferent from ours and they have no grounds forambition beyond their daily work, but even withoutmaking comparisons it's easy to see that you're all right. 
Hindrances there may be, doubts and disappointments,but that only means, what we all knew beforehand,that you get nothing without paying for it, that youhave to fight for every trivial point ; all the morereason for being proud instead of downcast. And aren’tyou fighting for us as well ? Doesn't that mean any-thing to you ? Doesn't that put new strength into you ?And the fact that I'm happy and almost conceited athaving such a brother, doesn't that give you any con-fidence ? It isn't what you've achieved in the Castlethat disappoints me, but the little that I'm able toachieve with you. You're allowed into the Castle,you're a regular visitor in the bureaux, you spendwhole days in the same room as Klamm, you're anofficially recognised messenger, with a claim on anofficial suit, you're entrusted with important com-missions, you have all that to your credit, and then ^ou"come down here and instead of embracing me andweeping for joy you seem to lose all heart as soon asyou set eyes on me, and you doubt everything, nothinginterests you but cobbling, and you leave the letter,the pledge of our future, lying in a corner.' That's


THE CASTLE

223
how I speak to him, and after iVe repeated the samewords day after day he picks up the letter at last witha sigh and goes off. Yet probably it's not the effectof what I say that drives him out, but a desire to goto the Castle again, which he dare not do withouthaving delivered his message." " But you're absolutelyright in everything you say," said K., " it's amazinghow well you grasp it all. What an extraordinarilycleiil mind yeu have ! " "'No," said Olga, " it takes
you in, and perhaps it takes him in too. For whathas he really achieved ? He's allowed in to a bureau,but it doesn't seem to be even a bureau. He speaks toKlamm, but is it Klamm ? Isn't it rather someonenv'ho's a little like Klamm ? A secretary, perhaps, atthe most, who resembles Klamm a little and takespains to increase the resemblance and poses a little inKlamm's* sleepy and dreamy ^tyle. That side of hisnature is the easiest to imitate, there are many who tryit on, although they have sense enough not to attemptanything more. And a man like Klamm who is somuch sought after and so rarely seen is apt to takedifferent shapes in people's imagination. For instance,Klamm has a village secretary here called Momus. 
You know him, do you ? He keeps well in the back-ground too, but I've seen him several times. A stoutly-built young man, isn't he ? And so evidently not inthe least like Klamm. And yet you'll find people inthe village who swear that Momus is Klamm, he andno other. That's how people work their own con-fusion. Is there any reason why it should be differentin the Castle ? Somebody pointed out that particularofficial to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually aresemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. 
And everything goes to support his doubt. Are we to


THE CASTLE

224
suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way amongother officials in a common room with a pencil behindhis ear? It's wildly improbable. Barnabas often says,somewhat like a child and yet in a child's mood oftrustfulness : ' The official is really very like Klamm,and if he were sitting in his own office at his owndesk with his name on the door I would have nomore doubt at all.* That's childish, but reasonable. 
Of course it would be still fimore reasonable of Barnabaswhen he's up there to ask a few people about the truthof things, for judging from his account there are plentyof men standing round. And even if their informationwere no more reliable than that of the man who pointedout Klamm of his own accord, there would be surelysome common ground, some ground for comparison,in the various things they said. That's not my idea,but Barnabas's, yet he doesn't dare to follow it out,he doesn't venture to speak to anybody for fear ofoffending in ignorance against some unknown rule andso losing his job ; you see how uncertain he feels ;and this miserable uncertainty of his throws a clearerlight on his position there than all his descriptions. 
How ambiguous and threatening everything must appearto him when he won't even risk opening his mouth toput an innocent question ! When I reflect on that Iblame myself for letting him go alone into those un-known rooms, which have such an effect on him that,though he's daring rather than cowardly, he apparentlytrembles with fright as he stands there."
" Here I think you've touched on the essential point,said K. " That's it. After all you've told me, I believeI can see the matter clearly, Barnabas is too young forthis task. Nothing he tells you is to be taken seriouslyat its face value. Since he's beside himself with fright


THE CASTLE

225
up there, he's incapable of observing, and when youforce him to give an account of what he has seen youget simply confused fabrications. That doesn’t surpriseme. Fear of the authorities is born in you here, and isfurther suggested to you all your lives in the most variousways and from every side, and you yourselves help tostrengthen it as much as possible. Still, I have no funda-mental objection to that ; if an authority is good whyshould it not# be feared ? Only one shouldn’t suddenlysend an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, whohas never been farther than this village, into the Castle,and then expect a truthful account of everything fromhim, and interpret each single word of his as if it were arevelation, and base one’s own life’s happiness on the in-terpretation. Nothing could be more mistaken. I admitthat I have let him mislead me in exactly the same wayand have set hopes upon him and sufl'ered disappoint-ments through him, both based simply on his own words,that is to say, with almost no basis.” Olga was silent. 
” It won’t be easy for me,” went on K., ” to talk youout of your confidence in your brother, for I see howyou love him and how much you expect from him. ButI must do it, if only for the sake of that very love andexpectation. For let me point out that there’s alwayssomething — I don’t know what it is — that hinders youfrom seeing clearly how much Barnabas has — I'll notsay achieved — but has had bestowed on him. He’spermitted to go into the bureaux, or if you prefer, intoan antechamber, well let it be an antechamber, it hasdoors that lead on farther, barriers which can be passedif one has the courage. To me, for instance, even thisantechamber is utterly inaccessible, for the present atleast. Who it is that Barnabas speaks to there I haveno idea, perhaps the clerk is the lowest in the whole8


THE CASTLE

226
Staff, but even if he is the lowest he can put one in touchwith the next man above him, and if he can't do thathe can at least give the other's name, and if he can't evendo that he can refer to somebody who can give the name. 
This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest traitin common with the real one, the resemblance may notexist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear,he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not evenbe an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of somekind to perform at the desk, he reads something or otherin his great book, he whispers something to the clerk,he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas oncein a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his actshave no significance whatever he has at least been setthere by somebody for some purpose. All that simplymeans that something is there, something which Barnabashas the chance of using, something or other at the veryleast ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't getany further than doubt and anxiety and despair. Andthat's only on the most unfavourable interpretation ofthings, which is extremely improbable. For we havethe actual letters which I certainly set no great store on,but more than on what Barnabas says. Let them beworthless old letters, fished at random from a pile ofother such worthless old letters, at random and withno more discrimination than the love-birds show in thefairs when they pick one's fortune out of a pile ; let thembe all that, still they have some bearing on my fate. 
They're evidently meant for me, although perhaps not -for my good, and, as the Superintendent and his wifehave testified, they are written in Klamm's own hand,and, again on the Superintendent's evidence, they havea significance which is oiJy private and obscure, it istrue, but still great." " Did the Superintendent say


THE CASTLE

227
that? '' asked Olga. Yes, he did,*' replied K. “ Imust tell Barnabas that," said Olga quickly ; " thatwill encourage him greatly." " But he doesn't needencouragement," said K. ; " to encourage him amountsto telling him that he's right, that he has only to go onas he is doing now, but that is just the way he will neverachieve anything by. If a man has his eyes bound youcan encourage him as much as you like to stare throughthe bandage, Jbut he'll never «ee anything. He'll be ableto see only when the bandage is removed. It's helpBarnabas needs, not encouragement. Only think, upthere you have all the inextricable complications of agreat authority — ^I imagined that I had an approximateconception of its nature before I came here, but howchildish my ideas were ! — up there, then, you have theauthorities and over against them Barnabas, nobodymore, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it wouldbe enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower-ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau."" Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi-culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we havereverence enough for the authorities, you said so your-self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " areverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence thatdishonours its object. Do you call it reverence thatleads Barnabas to abuse the privilege of admission tothat room by spending his time there doing nothing,or makes him when he comes down again belittle andd^espise the men before whom he has just been trembling,or allows him because he's depressed or weary to putoff delivering letters and fail in executing commissionsentrusted to him ? That's far from being reverence. 
But I have a further reproach to make, Olga ; I mustblame you too, I can't exempt you. Although you


THE CASTLE

228
fancy you have some reverence for the authorities, yousent Barnabas into the Castle in all his youth and weak-ness and forlornness, or at least you didn't dissuade himfrom going,"
" This reproach that you make," said Olga, " is oneI have made myself from the beginning. Not indeedthat I sent Barnabas to the Castle, I didn't send him,he went himself, but I ought to have prevented him byall the means in my powers by force, by oraft, by per-suasion. I ought to have prevented him, but if I hadto decide again this very day, and if I were to feel askeenly as I did then and still do the straits Barnabas isin, and our whole family, and if Barnabas, fully con-scious of the responsibility and danger ahead of him,were once more to free himself from me with a smile andset off, I wouldn't hold him back even to-day, in spiteof all that has happened in between, and I believe thatin my place you would do exactly the same. You don'tknow the plight we are in, that's why you're unfair toall of us, and especially to Barnabas. At that time wehad more hope than now, but even then our hope wasn'tgreat, but our plight was great, and is so still. Hasn'tFrieda told you anything about us ? " " Mere hints,"
said K., " nothing definite, but the very mention of yourname exasperates her." " And has the landlady toldyou nothing either ? " " No, nothing." " Nor any-body else ? " " Nobody." " Of course ; how could
anybody tell you anything ? Everyone knows somethingabout us, either the truth, so far as it is accessible, or atleast some exaggerated rumour, mostly invention, andeverybody thinks about us more than need be, butnobody will actually speak about it, people are shy ofputting these things into words. And they're quiteright in tliat. It's difficult to speak of it even before


THE CASTLE

229
you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possible—isn't it ? — that you'll go away and not want to haveanything more to do with us, however little it may seemto concern you. Then we should have lost you, andI confess that now you mean almost more to me thanBarnabas's service in the Castle. But yet — and thisargument has been distracting me all the evening — youmust be told, otherwise you would have no insight intoour situationf and, what woftid vex me most of all, youwould go on being unfair to Barnabas. Complete accordwould fail between us, and you could neither help us,nor accept our additional help. But there is still onemore question : Do you really want to be told ? " ** Whydo you ask ? " said K., if it's necessary, I would ratherbe told, but why do you ask me so particularly ? "“ Superstition," said Olga. " You'll become involvedin our affairs, innocent as you are, almost as innocentas Barnabas." "Tell me quickly," said K., "I'm notafraid. You're certainly making it much worse than itis with such womanish fussing."
Amalia's Secret
" Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you itsounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first whyit should be of any importance. There's a great officialin the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of himalready," said K., " he had something to do with bring-ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini'hardly ever comes into the open. Aren't you mistakinghim for Sordini, spelt with a ' d ' ? " " You're quite
right," said K., " Sordini it was." " Yes," said Olga," Sordini is well known, one of the most industrious ofthe officials, he's often mentioned ; Sortini on the otherhand is very retiring and quite unknown to most people. 



THE CASTLE

230
More than three years ago I saw him for the first andlast time. It was on the third of July at a celebrationgiven by the Fire Brigade, the Castle too had contributedto it and provided a new fire-engine. Sortini, who wassupposed to have some hand in directing the affairs ofthe Fire Brigade, but perhaps he was only deputisingfor someone else — the officials mostly hide behind eachother like that, and so it's difficult to discover what anyofficial is actually responsible for — Sortinh took part inthe ceremony of handing over the fire-engine. Therewere of course many other people from the Castle,officials and attendants, and true to his character Sortinikept well in the background. He's a small, frail, re-flective-looking gentleman, and one thing about himstruck all the people who noticed him at all, the wayhis forehead was furrowed ; all the furrows — and therewere plenty of them although he's certainly not morethan forty — were spread fan wise over his forehead,running towards the root of his nose, I've never seenanything like it. Well then, we had that celebration. 
Amalia and I had been excited about it for weeks before-hand, our Sunday clothes had been done up for theoccasion and were partly new, Amalia's dress was speci-ally fine, a white blouse foaming high in front with onerow of lace after the other, our mother had taken everybit of her lace for it. I was jealous, and cried half thenight before the celebration. Only when the Bridge
Inn landlady came to see us in the morning " “ The
Bridge Inn landlady?" asked K. "Yes," said Olg^,^" she was a great friend of ours, well, she came and hadto admit that Amalia was the finer, so to console meshe lent me her own necklace of Bohemian garnets. 
When we were ready to go and Amalia was standingbeside me and we were all admiring her, my father


THE CASTLE

231
said : * To-day, mark my words, Amalia will find ahusband ' ; then, I don't know why, I took my necklace,my great pride, and hung it round Amalia's neck, andwasn't jealous any longer. I bowed before her triumphand I felt that everyone must bow before her, perhapswhat amazed us so much was the difference in herappearance, for she wasn't really beautiful, but hersombre glance, and it has kept the same quality sincethat day, was high over ourlieads and involuntarily onehad almost literally to bow before her. Everybodyremarked on it, even Lasemann and his wife who cameto fetch us." " Lasemann ? " asked K. " Yes, Lase-mann," said Olga, " we were in high esteem, and thecelebration couldn't well have begun without us, formy father was the third in command of the Fire Brigade."" Was your father still so active ? " asked K. " Father ? "returned Olga, as if she did not quite comprehend," three years ago he was still relatively a young man,for instance, when a fire broke out at the Herrenhofhe carried an official, Galater, who is a heavy man, outof the house on his back at a run. I was there myself,there was no real danger, it was only some dry woodnear a stove which had begun to smoke, but Galaterwas terrified and cried for help out of the window, andthe Fire Brigade turned out, and father had to carryhim out although the fire was already extinguished. Ofcourse Galater finds it difficult to move and has to becareful in circumstances like that. I'm telling you thisWy on father's account ; not much more than threeyears have passed since then, and look at him now."Only then did K. become aware that Amalia was againin the room, but she was a long way off at the table whereher parents sat, she was feeding her mother who couldnot move her rheumaticky arms, and admonishing her


THE CASTLE

232
father meanwhile to wait in patience for a little, it wouldsoon be his turn. But her admonition was in vain, forher father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame hisweakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon andthen out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neitherattempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long beforehe got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached thesoup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it andscattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. Andhave three years done that to him ? '' asked K., yet hecould not summon up any sympathy for the old people,and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt onlyrepulsion. Three years,*' replied Olga slowly, ** or,more precisely, a few hours at that celebration. Thecelebration was held on a meadow by the village, at thebrook ; there was already a large crowd there whenwe arrived, many people had come in from neighbouringvillages, and the noise was bewildering. Of course myfather took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughedwith delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine madehim happy, he began to examine it and explain it tous, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back,but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl underthe engine if there was something there he had to showus, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. Only Amaliapaid no attention to the engine, she stood upright besideit in her fine clothes and nobody dared to say a wordto her, I ran up to her sometimes and took her arm, butshe said nothing. Even to-day I cannot explain howwe came to stand for so long in front of the fire-enginewithout noticing Sortini until the very moment myfather turned away, for he had obviously been leaning ona wheel behind the fire-engine all the time. Of coursethere was a terrific racket all round us, not only the usual


THE CASTLE

233
kind of noise, for the Castle had presented the FireBrigade with some trumpets as well as the engine, extra-ordinary instruments on which with the smallest eflFort— a child could do it — one could produce the wildestblasts ; to hear them was enough to make one thinkthe Turks were there, and one could not get accustomedto them, every fresh blast made one jump. And becausethe trumpets were new everybody wanted to try them,and because k was a celebraflion, everybody was allowedto try. Right at our ears, perhaps Amalia had attractedthem, were some of these trumpet blowers. It was diffi-ciJt to keep one's wits about one, and obeying fatherand attending to the fire-engine was the utmost we werecapable of, and so it was that Sortini escaped our noticefor such a long time, and besides we had no idea whohe was. ‘ There is Sortini,' Lasemann whispered at lastto my father — was beside him — and father, greatlyexcited, made a deep bow, and signed to us to do thesame. Without having met him till now father hadalways honoured Sortini as an authority in Fire Brigadematters, and had often spoken of him at home, so it wasa very astonishing and important matter for us actuallyto see Sortini with our own eyes. Sortini, however,paid no attention to us, and in that he wasn't peculiar,for most of the officials hold themselves aloof in public,besides he was tired, only his official duty kept himthere. It's not the worst officials who find duties likethat particularly trying, and anyhow there were otherdfficials and attendants mingling with the people. Buthe stayed by the fire-engine and discouraged by hissilence all those who tried to approach him with somerequest or piece of flattery. So it happened that hedidn't notice us until long after we had noticed him. 
Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making


apologies for us did he look our way and scan us oneafter another wearily, as if sighing to find that therewas still another and another to look at, until he let hiseyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for shewas much taller than he* At the sight of her he startedand leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis-understood him at first and began to approach him,father leading the way, but he held us off with upliftedhand and then waved us way. That w/as all. Weteased Amalia a lot about having really found a husband,and in our ignorance we were very merry the whole ofthat afternoon. But Amalia was more silent than usual. 

‘ She's fallen head over ears in love with Sort ini,' saidBrunswick, who is always rather vulgar and has nocomprehension of natures like Amalia’s. Yet this timewe were inclined to think that he was right, we werequite mad that day, and all of us, even Amalia, wereas if stupefied by the sweet Castle wine when we camehome about midnight." " And Sortini ? " asked K. 
"Yes, Sortini,” said Olga, " I saw him several timesduring the afternoon as I passed by, he was sitting onthe engine shaft with his arms folded, and he stayedthere till the Castle carriage came to fetch him. Hedidn't even go over to watch the fire-drill at whichfather, in the very hope that Sortini was watching, dis-tinguished himself beyond all the other men of his age."
" And did you hear nothing more from him ? " askedK. " You seem to have a great regard for Sortini."
" Oh, yes, regard," said Olga, " oh, yes, and hear fron^him we certainly did. Next morning we were rousedfrom our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; theothers rolled back into their beds again, but I was com-pletely awake and ran to her. She was standing bythe window holding a letter in her hand which had just


THE CASTLE

^35
been given in through the window by a man who wasstill waiting for an answer. The letter was short, andAmalia had already read it, and held it in her droopinghand ; how I always loved her when she was tired likethat ! I knelt down beside her and read the letter. 
Hardly had I finished it when Amalia after a brief glanceat me took it back, but she couldn't bring herself to readit again, and tearing it in pieces she threw the fragmentsin die face of the man outiade and shut the window. 
That was the morning which decided our fate. I say' decided but every minute of the previous afternoonwas just as decisive." " And what was in the letter ? "asked K. " Yes, I haven't told you that yet," said Olga,the letter was from Sortini addressed to the girl withthe garnet necklace. I can't repeat the contents. It wasa summons to come to him at the Herrenhof, and tocome at once, for in half an hour he was due to leave. 
The letter was couched in the vilest language, such asI have never heard, and I could only half guess its mean-ing from the context. Anyone who didn't know Amaliaand saw this letter must have considered a girl whocould be written to like that as dishonoured, even ifshe had never had a finger laid on her. And it wasn'ta love letter, there wasn't a tender word in it, on thecontrary Sortini was obviously enraged because thesight of Amalia had disturbed him and distracted himin his work. Later on we pieced it all together for our-selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straighttO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account hadstayed in the village instead, and in the morning, beingvery angry because even overnight he hadn't succeededin forgetting her, had written the letter. One couldn'tbut be furious on first reading a letter like that, even themost cold-blooded person might have been, but though


THE CASTLE

236
with anybody else fear at its threatening tone wouldsoon have got the upper hand, Amalia only felt anger,fear she doesn't know, neither for herself nor for others. 
And while I crept into bed again repeating to myselfthe closing sentence, which broke off in the middle,
' See tliat you come at once, or else ! ' Amalia
remained on the window-seat looking out, as if she wereexpecting further messengers and were prepared to treatthem all as she had done *the first." " So that's whatthe officials are like," said K. reluctantly, " that's thekind of type one finds among them. What did yourfather do ? I hope he protested energetically in theproper quarter, if he didn't prefer a shorter and quickerway of doing it at the Herrenhof. The worst thing aboutthe story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easilyhave been made good, I don't know why you lay suchexaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letterfrom Sortini shame Amalia for ever ? — which is whatone would gather from your story, but that's a sheerimpossibility, it would have been easy to make up forit to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing mighthave blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed,and not Amalia. It's Sortini that horrifies me, thepossibility of such an abuse of power. The very thingthat failed this one time because it came naked andundisguised and found an effective opponent in Amalia,might very well succeed completely on a thousand otheroccasions in circumstances just a little less favourable,and might defy detection even by its victim." " HusI^**"said Olga, " Amalia's looking this way." Amalia hadfinished giving food to her parents and was now busytaking off her mother's clothes. She had just undonethe skirt, hung her mother's arms round her neck, liftedher a little, while she drew the skirt off, and now gently


THE CASTLE

^37
set her down again. Her father, still affronted becausehis wife was being attended to first, which obviouslyonly happened because she was even more helpless thanhe, was attempting to undress himself; perhaps, too,it was a reproach to his daughter for her imagined slow-ness ; yet although he began with the easiest and leastnecessary thing, the removal of the enormous slippersin which his feet were loosely stuck, he could not getthem pulled qflF at all, and wheezing hoarsely was forcedto give up trying, and leaned back stiffly in his chairagain. ** But you don't realise the really decisive thing,"said Olga, " you may be right in all you say, but thedecisive thing was Amalia's not going to the Herrenhof ;her treatment of the messenger might have been excused,it could have been passed over ; but it was because shedidn't go that the curse was laid upon our family, andthat turned her treatment of the messenger into anunpardonable offence, yes, it was even brought forwardopenly later as the chief offence." " What ! " criedK. at once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised herhands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say thatAmalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini ? "" No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such asuspicion, how can you believe that ? I don't knowanybody who's so right as Amalia in everything shedoes. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should ofcourse have upheld her just the same ; but her notgoing was heroic. As for me, I confess it frankly, hadh received a letter like that I should have gone. Ishouldn't have been able to endure the fear of whatmight happen, only Amalia could have done that. Forthere were many ways of getting round it ; another girl,for instance, might have decked herself up and wastedsome time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof


THE CASTLE

238
only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find thathe had left immediately after sending the messenger,which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^are fleeting. But Amalia neither did that nor anythingelse, she was too deeply insulted, and answered withoutreserve. If she had only made some pretence of com-pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of theHerrenhof at the right moment, our punishment couldhave been turned aside, we have very clever advocateshere who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing,but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing togo on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect toSortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " Butwhat is all this about punishment and advocates ? "said K. " Surely Amalia couldn't be accused orpunished because of Sortini 's criminal proceedings ? ""Yes," said Olga, " she could, not in a regular suit atlaw, of course ; and she wasn't punished directly, butshe was punished all right in other ways, she and thewhole family, and how heavy the punishment has beenyou are surely beginning to understand. In youropinion it's unjust and monstrous, but you're the onlyone in the village of that opinion, it's an opinion favour-able to us, and ought to comfort us, and would do thatif it weren't so obviously based on error. I can easilyprove that, and you must forgive me if I mention Friedaby the way, but between Frieda and Klamm, leavingaside the final outcome of the two affairs, the first pre-liminaries were much the same as between Amalia anf^Sortini, and yet, although that might have shocked youat die beginning, you accept it now as quite natural. 
And that's not merely because you're accustomed toit, custom alone couldn't blunt one's plain judgment,it's simply that you've freed yourself from prejudice."


THE CASTLE

239
No, Olga/' said K., “ I don't see why you drag inFrieda, her case wasn't the same, don't confuse twosuch different things, and now go on with your story."** Please don't be offended," said Olga, " if I persist inthe comparison, it's a lingering trace of prejudice onyour part, even in regard to Frieda, that makes youfeel you must defend her from a comparison. She's notto be defended, but only to be praised. In comparingthe two cas^s I don't say #they're exactly alike, theystand in the same relation as black to white, and thewhite is Frieda. The worst thing one can do to Friedais to laugh at her, as I did in the bar very rudely — andI was sorry for it later — but even if one laughs it's outof envy or malice, at any rate one can laugh. On theother hand, unless one is related to her by blood, onecan only despise Amalia. Therefore the two cases arequite different, as you say, but yet they are alike."" They're not at all alike," said K., and he shook hishead stubbornly, " leave Frieda out of it, Frieda got nosuch fine letter as that of Sortini's, and Frieda was reallyin love with Klamm, and, if you doubt that, you needonly ask her, she loves him still." " But is that reallya difference ? " asked Olga. " Do you imagine Klammcouldn’t have written to Frieda in the same tone ?That’s what the gentlemen are like when they rise fromtheir desks, they feel out of place in the ordinary worldand in their distraction they say the most beastly things,not all of them, but many of them. The letter to Amaliamay have been the thought of a moment, thrown ontRe paper in complete disregard for the meaning to betaken out of it. What do we know of the thoughts ofthese gentlemen ? Haven't you heard of, or heardyourself, the tone in which Klamm spoke to Frieda ?Klamm's notorious for his rudeness, he can apparently


THE CASTLE

240
sit dumb for hours and then suddenly bring out some-thing so brutal that it makes one shiver. Nothing ofthat kind is known of Sortini, but then very little isknown of him. All that's really known about him isthat his name is like Sordini's. If it weren't for thatresemblance between the two names probably hewouldn't be known at all. Even as the Fire Brigadeauthority apparently he's confused with Sordini, whois the real authority, and who exploits th^ resemblancein name to push things on to Sortini's shoulders, especi-ally any duties falling on him as a deputy, so that he canbe left undisturbed to his work. Now when a man sounused to society as Sortini suddenly felt himself inlove with a village girl, he'll naturally take it quitedifferently from, say, the joiner's apprentice next door. 
And one must remember, too, that between an officialand a village cobbler's daughter there's a great gulffixed which has to be somehow bridged over, and Sortinitried to do it in that way, where someone else mighthave acted diflerently. Of course we're all supposedto belong to the Castle, and there's supposed to be nogulf between us, and nothing to be bridged over, andthat may be true enough on ordinary occasions, butwe’ve had grim evidence that it's not true when anythingreally important crops up. At any rate, all that shouldmake Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you,and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they'recomparatively reasonable, and even for those intimatelyaffected by them much more endurable. When Klamn^writes a loving letter it's much more exasperating thanthe most brutal letter of Sortini's. Don't mistake me. 
I'm not venturing to criticise Klamm, I'm only com-paring the two, because you're shutting your eyes tothe comparison. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women,


THE CASTLE

241
he orders first one and then another to come to him,puts up with none of them for long, and orders them togo just as he ordered them to come. Oh, KlammwouIdn^t even give himself the trouble of writing a letterfirst. And in comparison with that is it so monstrousthat Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations withwomen are at least unknown, should condescend for onceto write in his beautiful official hand a letter, howeverabominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here inKlamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's lovefor him establish one ? The relation existing betweenthe women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult,or rather very easy to determine. Love always entersinto it. There's no such thing as an official's unhappylove affair. So in that respect it's no praise to say or agirl — I'm referring to many others besides Frieda — thatshe gave herself to an official only out of love. She lovedhim and gave herself to him, that was all, there's nothingpraiseworthy in that. But you'll object that Amaliadidn't love Sortini. Well, perhaps she didn't love him,but then after all perhaps she did love him, who candecide ? Not even she herself. How can she fancy shedidn't love him, when she rejected him so violently,as no official has ever been rejected ? Barnabas saysthat even yet she sometimes trembles with the violenceof the effort of closing the window three years ago. 
That is true, and therefore one can't ask her anything ;she has finished with Sortini, and that's all she knows ;livhether she loves him or not she does not know. But^e do know that women can't help loving the officialsonce they give them any encouragement, yes, they evenlove them beforehand, let them deny it as much as theylike, and Sortini not only gave Amalia encouragement,but leapt over the shaft when he saw her ; although


THE CASTLE

242
his legs were stiff from sitting at desks he leapt right overthe shaft. But Amalia's an exception, you will say. Yes,that she is, that she has proved in refusing to go toSortini, that's exception enough, but if in addition sheweren't in love with Sortini, she would be too excep-tional for plain human understanding. On that after-noon, I grant you, we were smitten with blindness, butthe fact that in spite of our mental confusion we thoughtwe noticed signs of Amalia's being in love, showed atleast some remnants of sense. But when all that's takeninto account, what difference is left between Friedaand Amalia 7 One thing only, that Frieda did whatAmalia refused to do." " Maybe," said K., " but forme the main difference is that I'm engaged to Frieda,and only interested in Amalia because she's a sister ofBarnabas’s, the Castle messenger, and because herdestiny may be bound up with his duties. If she hadsuffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an officialas your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I shouldhave taken the matter up seriously, but more from asense of public duty than from any personal sympathywith Amalia. But what you say has changed the aspectof the situation for me in a way I don't quite understand,but am prepared to accept, since it's you who tell me,and therefore I want to drop the whole affair ; I'm nomember of the Fire Brigade, Sortini means nothing tome. But Frieda means something to me, I have trustedher completely and want to go on trusting her, and itsurprises me that you go out of your way, while discussingAmalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidencein her. I'm not assuming that you're doing it withdeliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for inthat case I should have left long ago. You're not doingit deliberately, you're betrayed into it by circumstances,


THE CASTLE

24S
impelled by your love for Amalia you want to exalt herabove all other women, and since you can't find enoughvirtue in Amalia herself you help yourself out by be-littling the others. Amalia's act was remarkable enough,but the more you say about it the less clearly can it bedecided whether it was noble or petty, clever or foolish,heroic or cowardly ; Amalia keeps her motives lockedin her own bosom and no one will ever get at them. 
Frieda, on »the other hand, has done nothing at allremarkable, she has only followed her own heart, foranyone who looks at her actions with goodwill that isclear, it can be substantiated, it leaves no room forslander. However, I don't want either to belittle Amaliaor to defend Frieda, all I want is to let you see what myrelation is to Frieda, and that every attack on Friedais an attack on myself. I came here of my own accord,and of my own accord I have settled here, but all thathas happened to me since I came, and, above all, anyprospects I may have — dark as they are, they still exist— I owe entirely to Frieda, and you can't argue thataway. True, I was engaged to come here as a LandSurveyor, yet that was only a pretext, they were playingwith me, I was driven out of everybody’s house, they’replaying with me still to-day ; but how much morecomplicated the game is now that I have, so to speak,a larger circumference — which means something, itmay not be much — ^yet I have already a home, a posi-tion and real work to do, I have a promised wife who•^akes her share of my professional duties when I haveother business. I’m going to marry her and become amember of the community, and besides my officialconnection I have also a personal connection withKlamm, although as yet I haven't been able to makeuse of it. That’s surely quite a lot ? And when 1 come


THE CASTLE

244
to you, why do you make me welcome ? Why do youconfide the history of your family to me 1 Why do youhope that I might possibly help you? Certainly notbecause Vm the Land Surveyor whom Lasemann andBrunswick, for instance, turned out of their house a weekago, but because I'm a man with some power at myback. But that I owe to Frieda, to Frieda who is somodest that if you were to ask her about it, she wouldn'tknow it existed. And so, considering all tljis, it seemsthat Frieda in her innocence has achieved more thanAmalia in all her pride, for may I say that I have theimpression that you're seeking help for Amalia. Andfrom whom ? In the last resort from no one else butFrieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda ? "asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don'tthink I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, ourwhole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complainwe're carried farther than we realise. You're quiteright, there's a big difference now between us andFrieda, and it's a good thing to emphasise it once in awhile. Three years ago we were respectable girls andFrieda an outcast, a servant in the Bridge Inn, we usedto walk past her without looking at her, I admit wewere too arrogant, but that's how we were brought up. 
But that evening in the Herrenhof probably enlightenedyou about our respective positions to-day. Frieda withthe whip in her hand, and I among the crowd of servants. 
But it’s worse even than that ! Frieda may despise us,her position entitles her to do so, actual circumstances*compel it. But who is there who doesn't despise us ?Whoever decides to despise us will find himself in goodcompany. Do you know Frieda's successor ? Pepi, she'scalled. I met her for the first time the night before last,she used to be a chambermaid. She certainly outdoes


THE CASTLE

245
Frieda in her contempt for me. She saw me throughthe window as I was coming for beer, and ran to thedoor and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for along time and promise her the ribbon from my hairbefore she would let me in. But when I gave it to hershe threw it into a corner. Well, I can't help it if shedespises me, Tm partly dependent on her goodwill, andshe's the barmaid in the Herrenhof. Only for the timebeing, it's Jrue, for she efertainly hasn't the qualitiesneeded for permanent employment there. One onlyhas to overhear how the landlord speaks to Pepi andcompare it with his tone to Frieda. But that doesn'thinder Pepi from despising even Amalia, Amalia, whoseglance alone would be enough to drive Pepi with allher plaits and ribbons out of the room much fasterthan her own fat legs would ever carry her. I had tolisten again yesterday to her infuriating slanders againstAmalia until the customers took my part at last, althoughonly in the kind of way you have seen already." " Howtouchy you are," said K. " I only put Frieda in herright place, but I had no intention of belittling you, asyou seem to think. Your family has a special interestfor me, I have never denied it ; but how this interestcould give me cause for despising you I can't under-stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that evenyou will understand it yet ; can't you even understandthat Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the originalcause of our being despised ? " " That would be strange•indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemnAmalia for such an action, but despise her ? And evenif she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend,why should the contempt be extended to you others,her innocent family ? For Pepi to despise you, forinstance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know


THE CASTLE

246
it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out,K./' said Olga, ‘‘ to convert all the people who despiseus you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's allengineered from the Castle. I can still remember everydetail of that day following the morning I spoke of. 
Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived asusual, taken his share of the work and gone home, andwe were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia andmyself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele-bration and telling us his plans in connection with theFire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has itsown Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to thecelebration, and there had been much discussion aboutit, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen thatperformance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed greatapproval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour-ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis-ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors fromthe village ; there were several possible candidates,but father had hopes that he would be chosen. Thatwas what he was discussing, and in his usual delightfulway had sprawled over the table until he embraced halfof it in his arms, and as he gazed through the openwindow at the sky his face was young and shining withhope, and that was the last time I was to see it like that. 
Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had nevernoticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn'tbe placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in thehabit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly outof their mouths before they were forgotten, only ofcourse people were always ready to be taken in againnext time. Mother forbade her to say things like that,but father only laughed at her precocious air of wisdom. 



THE CASTLE

247
then he gave a start, and seemed to be looking roundfor something he had only just missed— but there wasnothing missing— and said tliat Brunswick had told himsome story of a messenger and a torn-up letter, did weknow anything of it, who was concerned in it, and whatit was all about 7 We kept silent ; Barnabas, who wasas youthful then as a spring Iamb, said somethingparticularly silly or cheeky, the subject was changed,and the whole affair forgottefi/*
Amalia’s Punishment
** But not long afterwards we were overwhelmedwith questions from all sides about the story of theletter, we were visited by friends and enemies, acquaint-ances and complete strangers. Not one of them stayedfor any length of time, and our best friends were thequickest to go. Lasemann, usually so slow and dignified,came in hastily as if only to see the size of the room,one look round it and he was gone, it was like a horriblekind of children’s game when he fled, and father,shaking himself free from some other people, ran afterhim to the very door and then gave it up ; Brunswickcame and gave notice, he said quite honestly that hewanted to set up in business for himself, a shrewd man,he knew how to seize the right moment ; customerscame and hunted round father’s storeroom for theboots they had left to be repaired, at first father triedto persuade them to change their minds — and we alll^ficked him up as much as we could — but later he gaveit up, and without saying a word helped them to findtheir belongings, line after line in the order-book wascancelled, the pieces of leather people had left with uswere handed back, all debts owing us were paid, every-thing went smoothly without the slighest trouble, they


THE CASTLE

248
asked for nothing better than to break every connectionwith us quickly and completely, even if they lost by it ;that counted for nothing. And finally, as we mighthave foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of theFire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me,Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop fromweakness in the lungs, a serious man who never couldlaugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired,whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputyCaptain, and to whom he had now to say that theBrigade required his services no longer and asked forthe return of his diploma. All the people who happenedto be in our house left their business for the momentand crowded round the two men, Seemann found itdifficult to speak and only kept on tapping father onthe shoulder, as if he were trying to tap out of himthe words he ought to say and couldn't find. And hekept on laughing, probably to cheer himself a littleand everybody else, but since he's incapable of laughingand no one had ever heard him laugh, it didn't occurto anybody that he was really laughing. But fatherwas too tired and desperate after the day he'd had tohelp anybody out, he looked even too tired to graspwhat was happening. We were all in despair, too, butbeing young didn't believe in the completeness of ourruin, and kept on expecting that someone in the longprocession of visitors would arrive and put a stop to itall and make everything swing the other way again. 
In our foolishness we thought that Seemann was th^very man. We were all keyed up waiting for his laughterto stop, and for the decisive statement to come out atlast. What could he be laughing at, if not at the stupidinjustice of what had happened to us ? Oh, Captain,Captain, tell them now at last, we thought, and pressed


THE CASTLE

249
close to him, but that only made him recoil from usin the most curious way. At length, however, he didbegin to speak, in response not to our secret wishes,but to the encouraging or angry cries of the crowd. 
Yet still we had hopes. He began with great praisefor our father. Called him an ornament to the Brigade,an inimitable model to posterity, an indispensablemember whose removal must reduce the Brigade almostto ruin. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. 
But he went on to say that since in spite of that theBrigade had decided, only as a temporar)^ measure ofcourse, to ask for his resignation, they would all under-stand the seriousness of the reason which forced theBrigade to do so. Perhaps if father had not distin-guished himself so much at the celebration of theprevious day it would not have been necessary to goso far, but his very superiority had drawn officialattention to the Brigade, and brought it into suchprominence that the spotlessness of its reputation wasmore than ever a matter of honour to it. And nowthat a messenger had been insulted, the Brigadecouldn't help itself, and he, Seemann, found himselfin the difficult position of having to convey its decision. 
He hoped that father would not make it any moredifficult for him. Seemann was glad to have got it out. 
He was so pleased with himself that he even forgothis exaggerated tact, and pointed to the diplomahanging on the wall and made a sign with his finger,ftther nodded and went to fetch it, but his handstrembled so much that he couldn't get it off the hook. 
I climbed on a chair and helped him. From thatmoment he was done for, he didn't even take thediploma out of its frame, but handed the whole thingover to Seemann. Then he sat down in a corner and


THE CASTLE

Z50
neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had toattend to the last people there by ourselves as well aswe could/* And where do you see in all this theinfluence of the Castle ? asked K. '' So far it doesn*tseem to have come in. What youVe told me about issimply the ordinary senseless fear of the people, maliciouspleasure in hurting a neighbour, specious friendship,things that can be found anywhere, and, I must say,on the part of your father — at least, so„ it seems tome — a certain pettiness, for what was the diploma?Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselvesweren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensableso much the better, and the one way he could havemade things difficult for the Captain would have beenby flinging the diploma at his feet before he had saidtwo words. But the significant thing to me is that youhaven't mentioned Amalia at all ; Amalia, who wasto blame for everything, apparently stood quietly inthe background and watched the whole house collapse."" No," said Olga, " nobody ought to be blamed,nobody could have done anything else, all that wasalready due to the influence of the Castle." " Influenceof the Castle," repeated Amalia, who had slipped inunnoticed from the courtyard ; the old people hadbeen long in bed. "Is it Castle gossip you're at?Still sitting with your heads together ? And yet youwanted to go away immediately you came, K., andit's nearly ten now. Are you really interested in thatkind of gossip ? There are people in the village wht>live on it, they stick their heads together just like youtwo and entertain each other by the hour. But Ididn't think you were one of them." " On the con-trary," said K., " that's exactly what I am, and more-over people who don't care for such gossip and leave


THE CASTLE

251
it all to others don’t interest me particularly.” ” In-deed,” said Amalia, ” well, there are many different1 4 kinds of interest, you know ; I heard once of a youngman who thought of nothing but the Castle day andnight, he neglected everything else and people fearedfor his reason, his mind was so wholly absorbed bythe Castle. It turned out at length, however, that itwasn’t really the Castle he was thinking of, but thedaughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, sohe got the girl and was all right again.” ” I think Iwould like that man,” said K. ” As for your likingthe man, I doubt it,” said Amalia, ” it's probably hiswife you would like. Well, don’t let me disturb you,I’ve got to go to bed, and I must put out the light forthe old folks’ sake. They’re sound asleep now, butthey don’t really sleep for more than an hour, andafter that the smallest glimmer disturbs them. Good-night.” And actually the light went out at once, andAmalia bedded herself somewhere on the floor nearher parents. ” Who’s the young man she mentioned ? ”asked K. ” I don’t know,” said Olga, ” perhapsBrunswick although it doesn’t fit him exactly, but itmight have been somebody else. It’s not easy to followher, for often one can’t tell whether she’s speakingironically or in earnest. Mostly she’s in earnest butsounds ironical.” ” Never mind explaining,” said K. 

“ How have you come to be so dependent on her ?Were things like that before the catastrophe ? Or didit*happen later ? And do you never feel that you wantto be independent of her ? And is there any sense inyour dependence ? She’s the youngest, and shouldgive way to you. Innocently or not, she was the personwho brought ruin on the family. And instead ofbegging your pardon for it anew every day she carries


THE CASTLE

252
her head higher than anybody else, bothers herselfabout nothing except what she chooses to do for herparents, nothing would induce her to become ac- ;quainted with your affairs, to use her own expression,and then if she does speak to you at all she's mostly inearnest, but sounds ironical. Does she queen it overyou on account of her beauty, which you've mentionedmore than once ? Well, you're all three very like eachother, but Amalia's distinguishing mark is hardly arecommendation, and repelled me the first time I sawit, I mean her cold hard eye. And although she's theyoungest she doesn't look it, she has the ageless look ofwomen who seem not to grow any older, but seemnever to have been young either. You see her everyday, you don't notice the hardness of her face. That'swhy, on reflection, I can't take Sortini's passion forher very seriously, perhaps he sent the letter simply topunish her, but not to summon her." " I won't argueabout Sort ini," said Olga, " for the Castle gentlemeneverything is possible, let a girl be as pretty or as uglyas you like. But in all the rest you're utterly mistakenso far as Amalia is concerned. I have no particularmotive for winning you over to Amalia's side, and if Itry to do it it's only for your own sake. Amalia insome way or other was the cause of our misfortunes,that's true, but not even my father, who was the hardesthit, and who was never very sparing of his tongue,particularly at home, not even my father has ever saida word of reproach to Amalia even in our very wofsttimes. Not because he approved of her action, he wasan admirer of Sortini, and how could he have approvedof it ? He couldn't understand it even remotely, forSortini he would have been glad to sacrifice himselfand all that was his, although hardly in the way


THE CASTLE

253
things actually happened, as an outcome apparently ofSortini's anger. I say apparently, for we never heardanother word from Sortini ; if he was reticent beforethen, from that day on he might as well have beendead. Now, you should have seen Amalia at thattime. We all knew that no definite *punishment wouldbe visited on us. We were only shunned. By the villageand by the Castle. But while we couldn't help noticingthe ostracism pf the village, the Castle gave us no sign. 
Of course we had no sign of favour from the Castle inthe past, so how could we notice the reverse ? Thisblankness was the worst of all. It was far worse thanthe withdrawal of the people down here, for theyhadn't deserted us out of conviction, perhaps they hadnothing very serious against us, they didn't despise usthen as they do to-day, they only did it out of fear, andwere waiting to see what would happen next. Andwe weren't afraid of being stranded, for all our debtorshad paid us, the settling-up had been entirely in ourfavour, and any provisions we didn't have were sentus secretly by relations, it was easy enough for us, itwas harvest time — though we had no fields of our ownand nobody would take us on as workers, so that forthe first time in our lives we were condemned to gonearly idle. So there we sat all together with thewindows shut in the heats of July and August. Nothinghappened. No invitations, no news, no callers, nothing."" Well," said K., " since nothing happened and youhad no definite punishment hanging over you, whatwas there to be afraid of ? What people you are !
“ How am I to explain it ? " said Olga. " We weren'tafraid of anything in the future, we were sufferingunder the immediate present, we were actually enduringour punishment. The others in the village were only


THE CASTLE

254
waiting for us to come to them, for father to open hisworkshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the mostbeautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come askingfor orders again, they were all sorry to have had to actas they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cutout of village life it means a loss for everybody, so whenthey broke with us they thought they were only doingtheir duty, in their place we should have done just thesame. They didn’t knoW very clearly ^yhat was thematter, except that the messenger had returned to theHerrenhof with a handful of tom paper. Frieda hadseen him go out and come back, had exchanged a fewwords with him, and then spread what she had learnedeverywhere. But not in the least from enmity to us,simply from a sense of duty which anybody would havefelt in the same circumstances. And, as I’ve said, ahappy ending to the whole story would have pleasedeverybody else. If we had suddenly put in an appear-ance with the news that everything was settled, thatit had only been a misunderstanding, say, which wasnow quite cleared up, or that there had been actuallysome cause for offence which had now been made good,or else — and even this would have satisfied people —that through our influence in the Castle the affair hadbeen dropped, we should certainly have been receivedagain with open arms, there would have been kissingsand congratulations, I have seen that kind of thinghappen to others once or twice already. And itwouldn’t have been necessary to say even as much^asthat ; if we had only come out in the open and shownourselves, if we had picked up our old connectionswithout letting fall a single word about the affair ofthe letter, it would have been enough, they would allhave been glad to avoid mentioning the matter ; it


THE CASTLE

255
was the painfulness of the subject as much as their fearthat made them draw away from us, simply to avoidhearing about it or speaking about^ it or thinking aboutit or being affected by it in any way. When Friedagave it away it wasn’t out of mischief but as a warning,to let the parish know that something had happenedwhich everybody should be careful to keep clear of. 
It wasn’t our family that was taboo, it was the affair,and our family only in so faS: as we were mixed up inthe affair. So if we had quietly come forward againand let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviourthat-the incident was closed, no matter in what way,and reassured public opinion that it was never likelyto be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been,everything would have been made all right in thatway, too, we should have found friends on all sides asbefore, and even if we hadn’t completely forgottenwhat had happened people would have understoodand helped us to forget it completely. Instead of thatwe sat in the house. I don’t know what we wereexpecting, probably some decision from Amalia, for onthat morning she had taken the lead in the family andshe still maintained it. Without any particular con-triving or commanding or imploring, almost by hersilence alone. We others, of course, had plenty todiscuss, there was a steady whispering from morningtill evening, and sometimes father would call me tohim in sudden panic and I would have to spend halfthe night on the edge of his bed. Or we would oftencrc*ep away together, I and Barnabas, who knewnothing about it all at first, and was always in a feverfor some explanation, always the same, for he realisedwell enough that the care-free years that others of hisage looked forward to were now out of the question


THE CASTLE

256
for him, so wc used to put our heads together, K., justlike we two now, and forget that it was night, and thatmorning had come again. Our mother was the feeblestof us dl, probably because she had not only enduredour common sorrows but the private sorrow of each ofus, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which,as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. Her favouriteseat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we partedwith it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room,well, there she sat and — we couldn't tell exactly whatwas wrong — used to doze or carry on long conversa-tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of herlips. It was so natural for us to be always discussingthe letter, to be always turning it over in all its knowndetails and unknown potentialities, and to be alwaysoutdoing each other in thinking out plans for restoringour fortunes ; it was natural and unavoidable, but notgood, we only plunged deeper and deeper into what wewanted to escape from. And what good were theseinspirations, however brilliant ? None of them couldbe acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative,and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia,and even if they had been put to Amalia they wouldhave met with nothing but silence. Well, I'm glad tosay I understand .Amalia better now than I did then,she had more to endure than all of us, it*s incompre-hensible how she managed to endure it and still survive. 
Mother, perhaps, had to endure all our troubles, butthat was because they came pouring in on her ; afidshe didn't hold out for long ; no one could say thatshe's holding out against them to-day, and even at thattime her mind was beginning to go. But Amalia notonly suffered, she had the understanding to see hersuffering clearly, we saw only the effects, but she knew >


THE CASTLE

^57
the cause, we hop^ for some small relief or other, sheknew that everything was decided, we had to whisper,she had only to be silent. She stood face to face withthe truth and went on living and endured her life thenas now. In all our straits* we were better oflF than she. 
Of course, we had to leave our house. Brunswick tookit on, and we were given this cottage, we brought ourthings over in several journeys with a handcart, Barna-bas and I pulling and father and Amalia pushingbehind, mother was already sitting here on a chest,for we had brought her here first, and she whimperedsoftly all the time. Yet I remember that even duringthose toilsome journeys — they were painful, too, for weoften met harvest waggons, and the people becamesilent when they saw us and turned away their faces —even during those journeys Barnabas and I couldn't stopdiscussing our troubles and our plans, so that we oftenstood stock still in the middle of pulling and had to beroused by father's * Hallo ' from behind. But all ourtalking made no difference to our life after the removal,except that we began gradually to feel the pinch ofpoverty as well. Our relatives stopped sending usthings, our money was almost done, and that was thetime when people first began to despise us in the wayyou can see now. They saw that we hadn't the strengthto shake ourselves clear of the scandal, and they wereirritated. They didn't underestimate our difficulties,although they didn't know exactly what they were, andthey knew that probably they wouldn't have stood upto them any better themselves, but that made it only^1 the more needful to keep clear of us — if we hadtriumphed they would have honoured us correspond-ingly, but since we failed they turned what had onlyheen a temporary measure* into a final resolve, and cut9


THE CASTLE

258
US off from the community for ever. We were no longerspoken of as ordinary human beings, our very namewas never mentione^, if they had to refer to us theycalled us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ;even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and youyourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your 6rstentry into it you thought it justified its reputation ;later on, when people occasionally visited us again, theyused to screw up their n<»ses at the nK>st trivial things,for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over thetable. Where should it hang if not over the table ? andyet they found it insupportable. But if we hung thelamp somewhere else they were still disgusted. What-ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable."
Petitions
" And what did we do meanwhile ? The worst thingwe could have done, something much more deservingof contempt than our original offence — we betrayedAmalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn'tgo on living like that, without hope of any kind we couldnot live, and we began each in his or her own fashionwith prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive-ness. We knew, of course, that we weren't in a positionto make anything good, and we knew too that the onlylikely connection we had with the Castle — throughSortini, who had been father's superior and had ap-proved of him — was destroyed by what had happened,and yet we buckled down to the job. Father begar^it,he started making senseless petitions to the Vil/ageSuperintendent, to the secretaries, the advocates, theclerks, usually he wasn't received at all, but if by guileor chance he managed to get a hearing — and how wcused to exult when the news came, and rub our hands !


THE CASTLE

259

—he was always thrown out immediately and neveradmitted again. Besides, it was only too easy to answerhim, the Castle always has the ativantage. What wasit that he wanted? What had 'been done to him?What did he want to be forgiven for ? When and bywhom had so much as a finger been raised against himin the Castle ? Granted he had become poor and losthis customers, etc., these were all chances of everydaylife, and happened in all shefps and markets ; was theCastle to concern itself about things of that kind? Itconcerned itself about the common welfare, of course,but it couldn't simply interfere with the natural courseof events for the sole purpose of serving the interest ofone man. Did he expect officials to be sent out to runafter his customers and force them to come back ? But,father would object — ^we always discussed the wholeinterview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corneras if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what wewere doing, but paid no attention — well, father wouldobject, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, hecould easily make up again for all he had lost, thatdidn't matter if only he were forgiven. But what wasthere to forgive ? came the answer ; no accusationhad come in against him, at least there was none in theregisters, not in those registers anyhow which wereaccessible to the public advocates, consequently, so faras could be established, there was neither any accusa-tion standing against him, nor one in process of beingtaken up. Could he perhaps refer to some officialdecree that had been issued against him ? Fathercouldn't do that. Well then, if he knew of nothing andnothing had happened, what did he want ? What wasthere to forgive him ? Nothing but the way he wasaimlessly wasting official time, but that was just the


THE CASTLE

260
unforgivable sin. Father didn't give in, he was stillvery strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gavehim plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, itwon’t take long now, he used to say to Barnabas andme several times a day, but only in a low voice in caseAmalia should hear, and yet he only said it for herbenefit, for in reality he wasn’t hoping for the restora-tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. Yet beforehe could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and thatwas denied in all the bureaux. He hit upon the idea —and it showed that his mind was already giving way —that his guilt was being concealed from him because hedidn’t pay enough ; until then he had paid only theestablished taxes, which were at least high enough formeans like ours. But now he believed that he mustpay more, which was certainly a delusion, for, althoughour officials accept bribes simply to avoid trouble anddiscussion, nothing is ever achieved in that way. Still,if father had set his hopes on that idea, we didn’t wantthem upset. We sold what we had left to sell — nearlyall things we couldn’t do without — to get father themoney for his efforts, and for a long time every morningbrought us the satisfaction of knowing that when hewent on his day’s rounds he had at least a few coins torattle in his pocket. Of course we simply starved allday, and the only thing the money really did was tokeep father fairly hopeful and happy. That couldhardly be called an advantage, however. He worehimself out on these rounds of his, and the money onlymade them drag on and on instead of coming to a quickand natural end. Since in reality nothing extra couldbe done for him in return for those extra payments,clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of givingsomething in return, promising to look the matter up,


THE CASTLE

261
and hinting that they were on the track of something,and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty,they would follow it up— and fathtr, instead of growingsceptical, only became more and inore credulous. Heused to bring home such obviously worthless promisesas if they were great triumphs, and it was a torment tosee him behind Amalia's back twisting his face in asmile and opening his eyes wide as he pointed to herand made sigjns to us that Hfer salvation, which wouldhave surprised nobody so much as herself, was comingnearer and nearer through his efforts, but that it wasstill a secret and we mustn't tell. Things would certainlyhave gone on like this for a long time if we hadn'tfinally been reduced to the position of having no moremoney to give him. Barnabas, indeed, had been takenon meanwhile by Brunswick, after endless imploring,as an assistant, on condition that he fetched his workin the dusk of the evening and brought it back againin the dark — it must be admitted that Brunswick wastaking a certain risk in his business for our sake, but inexchange he paid Barnabas next to nothing, and Barna-bas is a model workman — ^yet his wages were barelyenough to keep us from downright starvation. Verygently and after much softening of the blow we told ourfather that he could have no more money, but he tookIt very quietly. He was no longer capable of under-standing how hopeless were his attempts at intervention,but he was wearied out by continual disappointments. 
Hj said, indeed — and he spoke less clearly than before,he used to speak almost too clearly — that he would haveneeded only a very little more money, for to-morrowor that very day he would have found out everything,and now it had all gone for nothing, ruined simply forlack of money, and so on but the tone in which he said


262 THE CASTLE
it showed that he didn't believe it all. Besides, hebrought out a new plan immediately of his own accord. 
Since he had failed | in proving his guilt, and conse-quently could hope Tor nothing more through oflScialchannels, he would have to depend on appeals alone,and would try to move the officials persondly. Theremust certainly be some among them who had goodsympathetic hearts, which they couldn't give way to intheir official capacity, but out of offjee hours, ifone caught them at the right time, they would surelylisten."
Here K., who had listened with absorption hitherto,interrupted Olga's narrative with the question : " Anddon't you think he was right ? " Although his questionwould have answered itself in the course of the narrativehe wanted to know at once. 

" No," said Olga, " there could be no question ofsympathy or anything of the kind. Young and inex-perienced as we were, we knew that, and father knewit too, of course, but he had forgotten it like nearlyeverything else. The plan he had hit on was to planthimself on the main road neai the Castle, where theofficials pass in their carriages, and seize any oppor-tunity of putting up his prayer for forgiveness. To behonest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if theimpossible should have happened, and his prayer havereally reached an official's ear. For how could a singleofficial give a pardon ? That could only be done atbest by the whole authority, and apparently even fficauthority can only condemn and not pardon. And inany case even if an official stepped out of his carriageand was willing to take up the matter, how could heget any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings ofa poor, tired, ageing man like father ? Officials are


THE CASTLE

26^
highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart-ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought froma single word, but let him have soriething from anotherdepartment explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nodpolitely, but he won't understand a word of it. That'squite natural, take even the small official affairs thatconcern the ordinary persoh — trifling things that anofficial disposes of with a shrug — and try to understandone of them through and thiough, and you'll waste a>\'hoIe lifetime on it without result. But even if fatherhad chanced on a responsible official, no official cansettle anything without the necessary documents, andcertainly not on the main road ; he can't pardon any-thing, he can only settle it officially, and he wouldsimply refer to the official procedure, which had alreadybeen a complete failure for father. What a pass fathermust have been in to think of insisting on such a plan IIf there were even the faintest possibility of getting any-thing in that way, that part of the road would be packedwith petitioners ; but since it's a sheer impossibility,patent to the youngest schoolboy, the road is absolutelyempty. But maybe even that strengthened father inhis hopes, he found food for them everywhere. He hadgreat need to find it, for a sound mind wouldn't havehad to make such complicated calculations, it wouldhave realised from external evidence that the thing wasimpossible. When officials travel to the village or backto the Castle it's not for pleasure, but because there'swo#k waiting for them in the village or in the Castle,and so they travel at a great pace. It's not likely tooccur to them to look out of the carriage windows insearch of petitioners, for the carriages are crammedwith papers which they study on the way."
‘‘ But," said K., " I've seen the inside of an official


THE CASTLE

264
sledge in which there weren't any papers/' Olga'sstory was opening for him such a great and almostincredible world tHit he could not help trying toput his own small « experiences in relation to it, asmuch to convince himself of its reality as of his ownexistence. 

That's possible," said Olga, " but in that case it'seven worse, for that means that the ofiBcial's businessis so important that the Y)apers are too precious or toonumerous to be taken with him, and those officials goat a gallop. In any case, none of them can spare timefor father. And besides, there are several roads to theCastle. Now one of them is in fashion, and mostcarriages go by that, now it's another and everythingdrives pell-mell there. And what governs this changeof fashion has never yet been found out. At eighto'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, tenminutes later on a third, and half an hour after thaton the first road again, and then they may stick to thatroad all day, but every minute there's the possibilityof a change. Of course all the roads join up near thevillage, but by that time all the carriages are racing likemad, while nearer the Castle the pace isn't quite so fast. 
And the amount of traffic varies just as widely andincomprehensively as the choice of roads. There areoften days when there's not a carriage to be seen, andothers when they travel in crowds. Now, just think ofall that in relation to father. In his best suit, whichsoon becomes his only suit, oflF he goes every morningfrom the house with our best wishes. He takes withhim a small Fire Brigade badge, which he has reallyno business to keep, to stick in his coat once he's outof the village, for in the village itself he's afraid to letit be seen, although it's so small that it can hardly be


THE CASTLE

265
seen two paces away, but father insists that it's just thething to draw a passing official's attention. Not farfrom the Castle entrance there'k a market garden,belonging to a man called BertucW who sells vegetablesto the Castle, and there on the narrow stone ledge atthe foot of the garden fence father took up his post. 
Bertuch made no objection because he used to be veryfriendly with father and had been one of his mostfaithful custopiers— you see, Me has a lame foot, and hethought that nobody but father could make him a bootto fit it. Well, there sat father day after day, it was awet and stormy autumn, but the weather meant nothingto him. In the morning at his regular hour he had hishand on the latch and waved us good-bye, in theevening he came back soaked to the skin, every day, itseemed, a little more bent, and flung himself down ina corner. At first he used to tell us all his little adven-tures, such as how Bertuch for sympathy and oldfriendship's sake had thrown him a blanket over thefence, or that in one of the passing carriages he thoughthe had recognised this or the other official, or thatthis or the other coachman had recognised him againand playfully flicked him with his whip. But later hestopped telling us these things, evidently he had givenup all hope of ever achieving anything there, andlooked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go thereand spend the whole day. That was when his rheumaticpains began, winter was coming on, snow fell early,th| winter begins very early here ; well, so there hesat sometimes on wet stones and at other times in thesnow. In the night he groaned with pain, and in themorning he was many a time uncertain whether to goor not, but always overcame his reluctance and went. 
Mother clung to him and didn't want to let him go. 



266

THE CASTLE

SO he, apparently grown timid because his limbswouldn't obey him, allowed her to go with him, and somother began to get i^ains too. We often went out tothem, to take them food, or merely to visit them, or totry to persuade them to come back home ; how oftenwe found them crouching together, leaning againsteach other on their narrow scat, huddled up undera thin blanket which scarcely covered them, and roundabout them nothing but 'the grey of snow and mist,and far and wide for days at a time not a soul to beseen, not a carriage ; a sight that was, K., a sight tobe seen ! Until one morning father couldn't move hisstiff legs out of bed at all, he wasn't to be comforted,in a slight delirium he thought he could see an officialstopping his carriage beside Bcrtuch's just at thatmoment, hunting all along the fence for him and thenclimbing angrily into his carriage again with a shakeof his head. At that father shrieked so loudly that itwas as if he wanted to make the official hear him at allthat distance, and to explain how blameless his absencewas. And it became a long absence, he never wentback again, and for weeks he never left his bed. Amaliatook over the nursing, the attending, the treatment, dideverything he needed, and with a few intervals has keptit up to this day. She knows healing herbs to soothehis pain, she needs hardly any sleep, she's never alarmed,never afraid, never impatient, she does everything forthe old folks ; while we were fluttering round uneasilywithout being able to help in anything she rcmaii^dcool and quiet whatever happened. Then when theworst was past and father was able again to strugglecautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him oneach side, Amalia withdrew into the background againand left him to us."


THE CASTLE

267

Olga's Plans
*' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupationfor father that he was still fit for, something that at leastwould make him believe that he was helping to removethe burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of thekind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact wouldhave been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch'sgarden, but \ found something that actually gave mea little hope. Whenever there had been any talk of ourguilt among officials or clerks or anybody else, it wasonly the insult to Sortini's messenger that had alwaysbeen brought up, further than that nobody dared togo. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, evenif only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult tothe messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly,everything might be put right if one could propitiatethe messenger. No charge had actually been made,we were told, no department therefore had taken upthe affair yet, and so the messenger was at liberty, asfar as he was concerned — and there was no questionof anything more — to forgive the offence. All that ofcourse couldn't have any decisive importance, was meresemblance and couldn't produce in turn anything butsemblance, but all the same it would cheer up my fatherand might help to harass the swarm of clerks who hadbeen tormenting him, and that would be a satisfaction. 
First of course one had to find the messenger. When1 told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed,for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ;for one thing he was convinced — this happened duringhis illness — that we had always held him back from finalsuccess, first by stopping his allowance and then bykeeping him in his bed; and for another he was no


THE CASTLE

268
longer capable of completely understanding any newidea. My plan was turned down even before I hadfinished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that hisjob was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud ashe was in no state now to go there every day himself,we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. 
But I didn't give in, and gradually he became reconciledto the idea, the only thing that disturbed him was thatin this matter he was quire dependent on, me, for I hadbeen the only one who had seen the messenger, he didnot know him. Actually one messenger is very likeanother, and I myself was not quite certain that I wouldknow this one again. Presently we began to go to theHerrenhof and look round among the servants. Themessenger of course had been in Sortini's service andSortini had stopped coming to the village, but thegentlemen are continually changing their servants, onemight easily find our man among the servants of anothergentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found,still one might perhaps get news of him from the otherservants. For this purpose it was of course necessaryto be in the Herrenhof every evening, and people weren’tvery pleased to see us anywhere, far less in a place likethat ; and we couldn’t appear either as paying cus-tomers. But it turned out that they could put us tosome use all the same. You know what a trial theservants were to Frieda, at bottom they are mostly quietpeople, but pampered and made lazy by too little work— ‘ May you be as well off as a servant ' is a favouStctoast among the officials — and really, as far as an easylife goes, tfie servants seem to be the real masters inthe Castle, they know their own dignity too, and in theCastle, where they have to behave in accordance withtheir regulations, they’re quiet and dignified, several


THE CASTLE

269
times Tvc been assured of that, and one can find evenamong the servants down here some faint signs of that,but only faint signs, for usually, *eing that the Castleregulations aren’t fully binding out them in the village,they seem quite changed ; a wild unmanageable lot,ruled by their insatiable impulses instead of by theiiregulations. Their scandalous behaviour knows nolimits, it’s lucky for the village that they can't leavethe Herrenhof without permisSion, but in the Herrenhofitself one must try to get on with them somehow ; Frieda,for instance, felt that very hard to do and so she wasvery glad to employ me to quieten the servants. Formore than two years, at least twice a week, Tve spentthe night with the servants in the stalls. Earlier, whenfather was still able to go to the Herrenhof with me,he slept somewhere in the taproom, and in that waywaited for the news that I would bring in the morning. 
There wasn't much to bring We've never found themessenger to this day, he must be still with Sortini whovalues him very highly, and he must have followedSortini when Sortini retired to a more remote bureau. 
Most of the servants haven't seen him since we saw himlast ourselves, and when one or other claims to haveseen him it's probably a mistake. So my plan mighthave actually failed, and yet it hasn't failed completely ;It's true we haven't found the messenger, and going tothe Herrenhof and spending the night there — perhapshis pity for me, too, any pity that he's still capable of —hay unfortunately ruined my father, and for two yearsnow he has been in the state you've seen him in, andyet things are perhaps better with him than with mymother, for we're waiting daily for her death ; it hasonly been put oflF thanks to Amalia's superhuman efforts. 
But what I've achieved in the Herrenliof is a certain


THE CASTLE

270
connection with the Castle ; don't despise me whenI say that I don't repent what I've done. What con-ceivable sort of a connection with the Castle can this be,you'll no doubt be tttinking ; and you're right, it's notmuch of a connection. I know a great many of theservants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen'sservants who have come to the village during the lasttwo years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan'tbe a stranger there. Of ^course they're servants onlyin the village, in the Castle they're quite different, andprobably wouldn't know me or anybody else there thatthey've had dealings with in the village, that's quitecertain, even if they have sworn a hundred times in thestall that they would be delighted to see me again inthe Castle. Besides, I've already had experience of howlittle all these promises are worth. But still that's notthe really important thing. It isn't only through theservants themselves that I have a connection with theCastle, for apart from that I hope and trust that whatI'm doing is being noticed by someone up there — andthe management of the staff of servants is really anextremely important and laborious official function—and that finally whoever is noticing me may perhapsarrive at a more favourable opinion of me than theothers, that he may recognise that I'm fighting for myfamily and carrying on my father's efforts, no matterin how poor a way. If he should see it like that, perhapshe'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser-vants and using it for our family. And I've achieif^dsomething more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, willblame me for. I learned a great deal from the servantsabout the ways in which one can get into the Castleservice without going through the difficult preliminariesof official appointment lasting Sometimes for years ;


THE CASTLE

271
in that case, it*s true, one doesn’t become an actualofficial employee, but only a private and semi-officialone, one has neither rights nor auties — and the worstis not to have any duties — but olie advantage one doeshave, that one is on the spot, one can watch for favourableopportunities and take advantage of them, one may notbe an employee, but by good luck some work may comeone’s way, perhaps no real employee is handy, there'sa call, one §ies to answer id, and one has become thevery thing that one wasn't a minute before, an employee. 
Only, when is one likely to get a chance like that?Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one hashardly had time to look round before the chance isthere, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind,being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ;but in another case one may have to wait for even moreyears than the official employees, and after being asemi-official servant for so long one can never be law-fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. Sothere's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks tonothing when one takes into account that the test forthe official appointments is very stringent and that amember of any doubtful family is turned down inadvance ; let us say someone like that goes in for theexamination, for years he waits in fear and tremblingfor the result, from the very first day everybody askshim in amazement how he could have dared to do any-thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping — how elsecjjfuld he keep alive ? — then after years and years, perhapsas an old man, he learns that he has been rejected,learns that everything is lost and that all his life hasbeen in vain. Here, too, of course there are exceptions,that's how one is so easily tempted. It happens some-times that really shady customers are actually appointed. 



THE CASTLE

272
there arc officials who, literally in spite of themselves,are attracted by those ^utlaws ; at the entrance examina-tions they can't help sniffing the air, smacking their lips,and rolling their eyes towards an entrant like that, whoseems in some way to be terribly appetising to them,and they have to stick close to their books of regulationsso as to withstand him. Sometimes, however, thatdoesn't help the entrant to an appointment, but onlyleads to an endless postp'onement of the^ preliminaryproceedings, which are never terminated, but onlybroken off by the death of the poor man. So officialappointment no less than the other kind is full of obviousand concealed difficulties, and before one goes in foranything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigheverything carefully. Now, we didn't fail to do that,Barnabas and I. Every time that I came back from theHerrenhof we sat down together and I told the latestnews that I had gathered, for days we talked it over,and Barnabas's work lay idle for longer spells than wasgood for it. And here I may be to blame in your opinion. 
I knew quite well that much reliance was not to be put onthe servants' stories. I knew that they never had muchinclination to tell me things about the Castle, that theyalways changed the subject, and that every word hadto be dragged out of them, and then, when they werewell started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense,bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im-probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in thedark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ftoff, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps oftruth could be picked up. But I repeated everythingto Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he stillhad no capacity whatever to distinguish between whatwas true and what was false, and on account of the


TMfi CASTLfi

^7}
family position was almost famishing to hear all thesethings ; and he drank in everything and burned witheagerness for more. And as a matter of fact the corner-stone of my new plan was Barnabas. Nothing morecould be done through the servants. Sortini*s messengerwas not to be found and would never be found* Sortiniand his messenger with him seemed to be recedingfarther and farther, by many people their appearanceand names were already forj|otten, and often I had todescribe them at length and in spite of that learn nothingmore than that the servant I was speaking to couldremember them with an effort, but except for that couldtell nothing about them. And as for my conduct withthe servants, of course I had no power to decide howit might be looked on and could only hope that theCastle would judge it in the spirit I did it in, and thatin return a little of the guilt of our family would be takenaway, but Tve received no outward sign of that. StillI stuck to it, for so far as I was concerned I saw no otherchance of getting anything done for us in the Castle. 
But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. From thetales of the servants — if I had the inclination, and I hadonly too much inclination — could draw the conclusionthat anyone who was taken into the Castle service coulddo a great deal for his family. But then what was therethat was worthy of belief in these tales ? It was im-possible to make certain of that, but that there was verylittle was clear. For when, say, a servant that I wouldnever see again, or that I would hardly recognise evenwere I to see him again, solemnly promised me to helpto get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, ifBarnabas should come to the Castle on other business,to support him, or at least to back him up — for accordingto the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi-


THE CASTLE

274
dates for posts become unconscious or deranged duringthe protracted waiting and then they're lost if somefriend doesn't look after them — ^when things like thatand a great many more were told to me, they wereprobably justified as warnings, but the promises thataccompanied them were quite baseless. But not toBarnabas ; it's true I warned him not to believe them,but my mere telling of them was enough to enlist himfor my plan. The reasons* I advanced for it myself im-pressed him less, the thing that chiefly influenced himwas the servants' stories. And so in reality I was com-pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the onlyone who could make herself understood to my parents,and the more I followed, in my own way, the originalplans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off fromme, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but notwhen we're alone ; to the servants in the HerrenhofI was a plaything which in their fury they did their bestto wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken withany of them during those two years. I've had onlycunning or lying or silly words from them, so onlyBarnabas remained for me, and Barnabas was still veryyoung. When I saw the light in his eyes as I told himthose things, a light which has remained in them eveisince, I felt terrified and yet I didn't stop, the things atstake seemed too great. I admit I hadn't my father'sgreat though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution thatmen have, I confined myself to making good the insultto the messenger, and only asked that the actual modestyof my attempt should be put to my credit. But what Ihad failed to do by myself I wanted now to achieve ina different way and with certainty through Barnabas. 
We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a moreremote bureau ; what was more natural than for us


THE CASTLE

275
to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas,so that the other messenger's |vork might be carriedon by him, and the other messenger might remainquietly in retirement as long as»he liked, for as long atime as he needed to forget the insult ? I was quiteaware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty therewas a hint of presumption in my plan, that it mightgive rise to the impression that we wanted to dictateto the autj^orities how they should decide a personalquestion, or that we doubted their ability to make thebest arrangements, which they might have made longbefore we had struck upon the idea that something couldbe done. But then, I thought again that it was impossiblethat the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly,or if they should, that they should do so intentionally,than in other words all that I did should be turned downin advance without further examination. So I did notgive in and Barnabas's ambition kept him from givingin. In this term of preparation Barnabas became souppish that he found that cobbling was far too menialwork for him, a future bureau employee, yes, he evendared to contradict Amalia, and flatly, on the few occa-sions that she spoke to him about it. I didn't grudgehim this brief happiness, for with the first day that hewent to the Castle his happiness and his arrogance wouldbe gone, a thing easy enough to foresee. And now beganthat parody of service of which Tve told you already. 
It was amazing with what little difficulty Barnabas gotinto the Castle that first time, or more correctly into thebureau which in a manner of speaking has become hisworkroom. This success drove me almost frantic at thetime, when Barnabas whispered the news to me in theevening after he came home. I ran to Amalia, seizedher, drew her into a corner, and kissed her so wildly that


THE CASTLE

276
she cried with pain and terror. I could explain nothingfor excitement, and th^ it had been so long since wehad spoken to each other, so I put oflF telling her untilnext day or the day aftfer. For the next few days, how-ever, there was really nothing more to tell. After thefirst quick success nothing more happened. For twolong years Barnabas led this heart-breaking life. Theservants failed us completely, I gave Barnabas a shortnote to take with him recommending him tp their con-sideration, reminding them at the same time of theirpromises, and Barnabas, as often as he saw a servant,drew out the note and held it up, and even if he some-times may have presented it to someone who didn'tknow me, and even if those who did know me wereirritated by his way of holding out the note in silence —for he didn't dare to speak up there — yet all the sameit was a shame that nobody helped him, and it was arelief — which we could have secured, I must admit, byour own action and much earlier — when a servant whohad probably been pestered several times already bythe note, crushed it up and flung it into the wastepaperbasket. Almost as if he had said : ‘ That's just whatyou yourselves do with letters,' it occurred to me. Butbarren of results as all this time was in other ways, ithad a good effect on Barnabas, if one can call it a goodthing that he grew prematurely old, became a manbefore his time, yes, even in some ways more grave andsensible than most men. Often it makes me sad to lookat him and compare him with the boy that he was only^two years ago. And with it all I'm quite without thecomfort and support that, being a man, he could surelygive me. Without me he could hardly have got intothe Castle, but since he is there, he's independent of me. 
I'm his only intimate friend, but I'm certain that he


THR CASTLE

277
only tells me a small part of what he has on his mind. 
He tells me a great many things about the Castle, butfrom his stones, from the trifling details that he gives,one can't understand in the least liow those things couldhave changed him so much. In particular I can't under-stand how the daring he had as a boy — it actually causedus anxiety — how he can have lost it so completely upthere now that he's a man. Of course all that uselessstanding abput and waiting *all day, and day after day,and going on and on without any prospect of a change,must break a man down and make him unsure of himselfand in the end actually incapable of anything else butthis hopeless standing about. But why didn't he putup a fight even at the beginning ? Especially seeingthat he soon recognised that I had been right and thatthere was no opportunity there for his ambition, thoughthere might be some hope perhaps for the bettermentof our family's condition. For up there, in spite of theservants' whims, everything goes on very soberly, ambi-tion seeks its sole satisfaction in work, and as in this waythe work itself gains the ascendancy, ambition ceasesto have any place at all, for childish desires there's noroom up there. Nevertheless Barnabas fancied, so hehas told me, that he could clearly see how great thepower and knowledge even of those very questionableofficials were into whose bureau he is allowed. Howfast they dictated, with half-shut eyes and brief gestures,merely by raising a finger quelling the surly servants,affid making them smile with happiness even when theywere checked ; or perhaps finding an important passagein one of the books and becoming quite absorbed in it,while the others would crowd round as near as thecramped space would allow them, and crane their necksto see it. These things and other things of the same kind


THE CASTLE

278
gave Barnabas a great idea of those men, and he haddie feeling that if he co|ild get the length of being noticedby them and could venture to address a few words tothem, not as a stranger, but as a colleague — ^true avery subordinate colleague — in the bureau, incalculablethings might be achieved for our family. But thingshave never got that length yet, and Barnabas can’tventure to do anything that might help towards it,although he’s well aware that, young as he js, he’s beenraised to the difficult and responsible position of chiefbreadwinner in our family on account of this wholeunfortunate affair. And now for the final confession ;it was a week after your arrival. I heard somebodymentioning it in the Herrenhof, but didn’t pay muchattention ,* a Land Surveyor had come and I didn’t evenknow what a Land Surveyor was. But next eveningBarnabas — at an agreed hour I usually set out to go apart of the way to meet him — came home earlier thanusual, saw Amalia in the sitting-room, drew me outinto the street, laid his head on my shoulder, and criedfor several minutes. He was again the little boy he usedto be. Something had happened to him that he hadn’tbeen prepared for. It was as if a whole new world hadsuddenly opened to him, and he could not bear the joyand the anxieties of all this newness. And yet the onlything that had happened was that he had been givena letter for delivery to you. But it was actually the firstletter, the first commission, that he had ever been given.”
Olga stopped. Everything was still except for thfeheavy, occasionally disturbed breathing of the old people. 
K. merely said casually, as if to round oflF Olga’s story :” You’ve all been playing with me. Barnabas broughtme the letter with the air of an old and much occupiedmessenger, and you as well as Amalia — ^who for that


THE CASTLE

279
time must have been in with you— behaved as if carryingmessages and the letter itself wwe matters of indiflFer-encc." You must distinguish between us/* said Olga. 
“ Barnabas had been made a happy boy again by theletter, in spite of all the doubts that he had about hiscapability. He confined those doubts to himself andme, but he felt it a point of honour to look like a realmessenger, as according to his ideas real messengerslooked. So^although his hopes were now rising to anofficial uniform I had to alter his trousers, and in twohours, so that they would have some resemblance atleast to the close-fitting trews of the official uniform,and he might appear in them before you, knowing, ofcourse, that on this point you could be easily taken in. 
So much for Barnabas. But Amalia really despiseshis work as a messenger, and now that he seemed tohave had a little success — as she could easily guess fromBarnabas and myself and our talking and whisperingtogether — she despised it more than ever. So she wasspeaking the truth, don't deceive yourself about that. 
But if I, K., have seemed to slight Barnabas's work, ithasn't been with any intention to deceive you, but fromanxiety. These two letters that have gone throughBarnabas’s hands are the first signs of grace, questionableas they are, that our family has received for three years. 
This change, if it is a change and not deception — decep-tions are more frequent than changes — is connectedwith your arrival here, our fate has become in a certainsense dependent on you, perhaps these two letters areonly a beginning, and Barnabas's abilities will be usedfor other things than these two letters concerning vou —we must hope that as long as we can — for the time being,however, everything centres on you. Now up in theCastle we must rest content with whatever our lot


z&o

THE CASTLE

happens to be, but down here we can, it may be, dosomething ourselves, tl^at is, make sure of your good-will,or at least save ourselves from your dislike, or, what'smore important, protect you as far as our strength andexperience go, so that your connection with the Castle—by which we might perhaps be helped too — might notbe lost. Now what was our best way of bringing thatabout ? To prevent you from having any suspicion ofus when we approached yo\i — for you're a stranger hereand because of that certain to be full of suspicion, full ofjustifiable suspicion. And, besides, we're despised byeverybody and you must be influenced by the generalopinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how couldwe put ourselves forward without quite unintentionallysetting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend-ing you ? And the messages, which I had read beforeyou got them — Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes-senger he couldn't allow himself to do that — seemed atthe first glance obsolete and not of much importance,yet took on the utmost importance in as much as theyreferred you to the Superintendent. Now in these cir-cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towardsyou ? If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laidourselves under suspicion by overestimating what wasobviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as thevehicle of these messages we should be suspected ofseeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing thatwc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in youreyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. Butif we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should layourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that caseshould we have taken the trouble of delivering such anunimportant letter, why should our actions and ourwords be in such clear contradiction, why should wc


THE CASTLE

281
in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, butalso the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handedthe letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addresseeby our e^lanations ? And to hold the mean, withoutexaggeration on either side, in other words to estimatethe just value of those letters, is impossible, they them-selves change in value perpetually, the reBections theygive rise to are endless, and chance determines whereone stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of themis a matter of chance. And when on the top of thatthere came anxiety about you, everything became con-fused, and you mustn't judge whatever I said tooseverely. When, for example — as once happened —Barnabas arrived with the news that you were dis-satisfied with his work, and in his first distress — his pro-fessional vanity was wounded too I must admit — resolvedto retire from the service altogether, then to make goodthe mistake I was certainly ready to deceive, to lie, tobetray, to do anything, no matter how wicked, if it wouldonly help. But even then I would have been doing it,at least in my opinion, as much for your sake as for ours."
There was a knock. Olga ran to the door and un-fastened it. A strip of light from a dark lantern fell acrossthe threshold. The late visitor put questions in a whisperand was answered in the same way, but was not satisfiedand tried to force his way into the room. Olga foundherself unable to hold him back any longer and called toAmalia, obviously hoping that to keep the old people frombeing disturbed in their sleep Amalia would do anythingto eject the visitor. And indeed she hurried over at once,pushed Olga aside, and stepped into the street and closedthe door behind her. She only remained there for amoment, almost at once she came back again, so quicklyhad she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. 



282

THE CASTLE

K. then learned from Olga that the visit was intendedfor him. It had becup one of the assistants, who waslooking for him at Frieda's command. Olga hadwanted to shield K. from the assistant ; if K. shouldconfess his visit here to Frieda later, he could, but itmust not be discovered through the assistant ; K. 
agreed. But Olga's invitation to spend the night thereand wait for Barnabas he declined, for himself he mightperhaps have accepted fof it was already late in thenight and it seemed to him that now, whether hewanted it or not, he was bound to this family in sucha way that a bed for the night here, though for manyreasons painful, nevertheless, when one considered thiscommon bond, was the most suitable for him in thevillage ; all the same he declined it, the assistant's visithad alarmed him, it was incomprehensible to him howFrieda, who knew his wishes quite well, and the assist-ants, who had learned to fear him, had come togetheragain like this, so that Frieda didn't scruple to send anassistant for him, only one of them, too, while the otherhad probably remained to keep her company. Heasked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one,but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; thenhe asked whether there was any other way out of thehouse, there was one through the yard, only one hadto clamber over the wall of the neighbouring gardenand walk through it before one reached the street. 
K. decided to do this. While Olga was conducting himthrough the yard, K. tried hastily to reassure her feaK,told her that he wasn't in the least angry at the smaflartifices she had told him about, but understood themvery well, thanked her for the confidence she had shownin him in telling him her story, and asked her to sendBarnabas to the school as soon as he arrived, even if


THE CASTLE

283
it were during the night. It was true, the messages^vhich Barnabas brought were not^his only hope, other-wise things would be bad indeed with him, but hedidn't by any means leave then\ out of account, hewould hold to them and not forget Olga either, forstill more important to him than the messages them-selves was Olga, her bravery, her prudence, if he hadto choose between Olga and Amalia it wouldn't costhim much reflection. And he' pressed her hand cordiallyonce more as he swung himself on to the wall of theneighbouring garden. 


XVI
W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctlyin the darkness that a little farther along theassistant was still walking up and down before Barna-bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peepinto the room through the drawn blinds. K. calledto him ; without appearing visibly startled he gave uphis spying on the house and came towards K. “ Whoare you looking for ? " asked K., testing the supplenessof the hazel switch on his leg. You," replied theassistant as he came nearer. " But who are you ? "asked K. suddenly, for this did not appear to be theassistant. He seemed older, wearier, more wrinkled,fuller in the face, his walk too was quite differentfrom the brisk walk of the assistants, which gave animpression as if their joints were charged with elec-tricity ; it was slow, a little halting, elegantly vale-tudinarian. "You don't recognise me ? " asked thenian, " Jeremiah, your old assistant." " I see," said K. 



THE CASTLE

284
tentatively producing the ha2scl switch again, whichhe had concealed b^ind his back. But you lookquite different.'* “ It*s because I'm by myself,** saidJeremiah. “ When I^m by myself then all my youthfulspirits are gone.** ** But where is Arthur? ** asked K. 

Arthur ? ** said Jeremiah. “ The little dear ? He hasleft the service. You were rather hard and rough onus, you know, and the gentle soul couldn't stand it. 
He's gone back to the cSstle to put in a complaint."" And you ? " asked K. " I'm able to stay here," saidJeremiah, " Arthur is putting in a complaint for metoo." "What have you to complain about, then?"asked K. " That you can't understand a joke. Whathave we done ? Jested a little, laughed a little, teasedyour fiancee a little. And all according to our in-structions, too. When Gala ter sent us to you "
"Galater?" asked K. "Yes, Galater," repliedJeremiah, " he was deputising for Klamm himself atthe time. When he sent us to you he said — took agood note of it, for that's our business : You're to godown there as assistants to the Land Surveyor. Wereplied : But we don't know anything about the work. 
Thereupon he replied : That's not the main point :if it's necessary, he'll teach you it. The main thing isto cheer him up a little. According to the reports I'vereceived he takes everything too seriously. He has justgot to the village, and starts off thinking that a greatexperience, whereas in reality it's nothing at all. Youmust make him see that." " Well ? " said K., " wasGalater right, and have you carried out your task?*""That I don't know," replied Jeremiah. "In such ashort time it was hardly possible. I only know thatyou were very rough on us, and that's what we're com-plaining of. I can't understand how you, an employee


THE CASTLE

285
yourself and not even a Castle employee, aren’t ableto see that a job like that is very%hard work, and thatit's very wrong to make the work harder for the poorworkers, and wantonly, almost chijdislily, as you havedone. Your total lack of consideration in letting usfreeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur withyour fist on the straw sack — Arthur, a man who feelsa single cross word for days — and in chasing me upand down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was anhour before f could recover from it ! And I'm nolonger young ! " My dear Jeremiah,” said K.,” you're quite right about all this, only it's Galateryou should complain to. He sent you here of his ownaccord, I didn't beg him to send you. And as I hadn'tasked for you it was at my discretion to send you backagain, and like you, I would much rather have doneit peacefully than with violence, but evidently youwouldn't have it any other way. Besides, why didn'tyou speak to me when you came first as frankly asyou've done just now ? " “ Because I was in theservice," said Jeremiah, " surely that's obvious."" And now you're in the service no longer ? " asked K. 
" That's so," said Jeremiah, " Arthur has given noticein the Castle that we're giving up the job, or at leastproceedings have been set going that will finally set usfree from it." " But you’re still looking for me just asif you were in the service," said K. " No," repliedJeremiah, " I was only looking for you to reassureFriada. When you forsook her for Barnabas's sistershe was very unhappy, not so much because of the loss,as because of your treachery, besides she had seen itcoming for a long time and had suffered a great dealalready on that account. I only went up to the school-window for one more look to see if you mightn t


THE CASTLE

286
have become more reasonable. But you weren't there. 
Frieda was sitting hy herself on a bench crying. Sothen I went to her and we came to an agreement. 
Everything's settled. ^ I'm to be waiter in the Herrenhof^at least until my business is settled in the Castle, andFrieda is back in the taproom again. It's better forFrieda. There was no sense in her becoming your wife. 
And you haven't known how to value the sacrifice thatshe was prepared to make* for you either. But the goodsoul had still some scruples left, perhaps ^he was doingyou an injustice, she thought, perhaps, you weren'twith the Barnabas girl after all. Although of coursethere could be no doubt where you were, I went allthe same so as to make sure of it once and for all ; for ,after all this worry Frieda deserved to sleep peacefullyfor once, not to mention myself. So I went and notonly found you there, but was able to see incidentally 'as well that you had the girls on a string. The blackone especially — a real wild-cat — she's set her cap atyou. Well, every one to his taste. But all the same itwasn't necessary for you to take the roundabout waythrough the next-door garden, I know that way."
So now the thing had come after all which he had ibeen able to foresee, but not to prevent. Frieda hadleft him. It could not be final, it was not so bad asthat, Frieda could be won back, it was easy for anystranger to influence her, even for those assistants whoconsidered Frieda's position much the same as theirown, and now that they had given notice had promptedFrieda to do the same, but K. would only have to showhimself and remind her of all that spoke in his favour,and she would rue it and come back to him, especiallyif he should be in a position to justify his visit to thosegirls by some success due entirely to them. Yet in J


THE CASTLE

287

spite of those reflections, by which he sought to reassurehimself on Frieda’s account, ha was not reassured. 
Only a few minutes ago he had been praising Friedaup to Olga and calling her his only support ; well, thatsupport was not of the firmest, no intervention of the^ mighty ones had been needed to rob K. of Frieda —even this not very savoury assistant had been enough
this puppet which sometimes gave one the impression
of not being properly alive. *
Jeremiah hid already begun to disappear. K. calledhim back. " Jeremiah,” he said, ” I want to be quitefrank with you ; answer one question of mine too inthe same spirit. Were no longer in the position ofmaster and servant, a matter of congratulation not onlyto you but to me too ; we have no grounds, then, fordeceiving each other. Here before your eyes I snapthis switch which was intended for you, for it wasn’tfor fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so asto surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a fewtimes. But don’t take it badly, all that is over ; if youhadn't been forced on me as a servant by the bureau,but had been simply an acquaintance, we wouldcertainly have got on splendidly, even if your appear-ance might have disturbed me occasionally. And wecan make up now for what we have missed in that way. 

” Do you think so ? ” asked the assistant, yawning andclosing his eyes wearily. ” I could of course explainthe matter more at length, but I have no time, I mustgo wto Frieda, the poor child is waiting for me, shehasn't started on her job yet, at my request the landlordhas given her a few hours’ grace — she wanted to flingherself into the work at once probably to help her toforget — and we want to spend that little time at leasttogether. As for your proposal, I have no cause. 



THE CASTLE

288
certainly, to deceive you, but I have just as little toconfide anything to you. My case, in other words, isdifferent from yours. So long as my relation to youwas that of a servant, you were naturally a very import-ant person in my eyes, not because of your own qualities,but because of my oflSce, and I would have done any-thing for you that you wanted, but now you're of noimportance to me. Even your breaking the switchdoesn't affect me, it only reminds me what a roughmaster I had, it's not calculated to prejudice me inyour favour." " You talk to me," said K., " as if itwere quite certain that you'll never have to fear any-thing from me again. But that isn't really so. Fromall appearances you're not free from me, things aren't
settled here so quickly as that " " Sometimes even
more quickly," Jeremiah threw in. " Sometimes,"said K., " but nothing points to the fact that it's sothis time, at least neither you nor I have anything thatwe can show in black and white. The proceedingsare only started, it seems, and I haven't used my in-fluence yet to intervene, but I will. If the affair turnsout badly for you, you'll find that you haven't exactlyendeared yourself to your master, and perhaps it wassuperfluous after all to break the hazel switch. Andthen you have abducted Frieda, and that has given youan inflated notion of yourself, but with all the respectthat I have for your person, even if you have none forme any longer, a few words from me to Frieda will beenough — I know it — to smash up the lies that you'vecaught her with. And only lies could have estrangedFrieda from me." " These threats don't fiighten me,"replied Jeremiah, " you don't in the least want me asan assistant, you were afraid of me even as an assistant,you're afraid of assistants in any case, it was only fear


THE CASTLE

289
that made you strike poor Arthur." " Perhaps," saidK., but did it hurt the less far that? Perhaps Tilbe able to show my fear of you in that way many timesyet. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in anassistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again,in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. And more-over I'll do my best next time to see that you come byyourself, without Arthur, I'll be able then to devotemore attention to you." ^ Do you think," askedJeremiah, " that I have even the slightest fear of allthis ? " "I do think so," said K., " you're a littleafraid, that's certain, and if you're wise, very muchafraid. If that isn't so why didn't you go straight backto Frieda ? Tell me, are you in love with her, tlien ? "" In love 1 " said Jeremiah. " She's a nice clever girl,a former sweetheart of Klamm's, so respectable in anycase. And as she kept on imploring me to save herfrom you why shouldn't I do her the favour, particu-larly as I wasn't doing you any harm, seeing that you'veconsoled yourself with these damned Barnabas girls ? "" Now I can see how frightened you are," said K.," frightened out of your wits ; you're trying to catchme with lies. All that Frieda asked for was to besaved from those filthy swine of assistants, who weregetting past bounds, but unfortunately I hadn't timeto fulfil her wish completely, and now this is the resultof itiy negligence."
" Land Surveyor, Land Surveyor ! " someone shouteddown the street. It was Barnabas. He came up breath-less with running, but did not forget to greet K. witha bow. " It's done I " he said. " What's done ? "asked K. " You've laid my request before Klamm ? "" That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did mybest, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there10


THE CASTLE

290
all day without being asked and so close to the desk thatonce a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standingin his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up— and that's forbidden — by lifting my hand, I was thelast in the bureau, was left alone there with only theservants, but had the luck all the same to see Klammcoming back again, but it was not on my account, heonly wanted to have another hasty glance at somethingin a book and went away immediately ; finally, as Istill made no move, the servants almost swept me outof the door with the broom. I tell you all this so thatyou need never complain of my efforts again." " Whatgood is all your zeal to me, Barnabas," said K., " whenit hasn't the slightest success ? " " But I have had
success ! " replied Barnabas. "As I was leaving mybureau — I call it my bureau — saw a gentleman comingslowly towards me along one of the passages, whichwere quite empty except for him. By that time in factit was very late. I decided to wait for him. It was agood pretext to wait longer, indeed I would much ratherhave waited in any case, so as not to have to bring younews of failure. But apart from that it was worth whilewaiting, for it was Erlanger. You don't know him ?He's one of Klamm's chief secretaries. A weakly littlegentleman, he limps a little. He recognised me at once,he's famous for his splendid memory and his knowledgeof people, he just draws his brows together and that'senough for him to recognise anybody, often peopleeven that he’s never seen before, that he's only heand ofor read about ; for instance, he could hardly ever haveseen me. But although he recognises everybody immedi-ately, he always asks first as if he weren't quite sure. 
Aren't you Barnabas ? he asked me. And then he wenton : You know the Land Surveyor, don't you ? And


THE CASTLE

291
then he said : That’s very lucky. Tm just going to theHerrenhof. The Land Surveyor is»to report to me there. 
I'll be in room Number 15. But he must come at once. 
I've only a few things to settle tl^re and I leave againfor the Castle at 5 o'clock in the morning. Tell himthat it's very important that I should speak to him."
Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. In his excitementBarnabas had scarcely noticed his presence till now andasked : " Where's Jeremiah going ? " "To forestall
me with Erlanger," said K., and set off after Jeremiah,caught him up, hung on to his arm, and said : “Is ita sudden desire for Frieda that's seized you ? I've gotit as well, so we'll go together side by side."

XVII
B efore the dark Herrenhof a little group of menwere standing, two or three had lanterns withthem, so that a face here and there could be distinguished. 
K. recognised only one acquaintance, Gerstacker thecarrier. Gerstacker greeted him with the enquiry :“You're still in the village?" “Yes," replied K. 
“I've come here for good." “ That doesn't matter tome," said Gerstacker, breaking out into a fit of coughingand turning away to the others. 

It turned out that they were all waiting for Erlanger. 
Ei;lflnger had already arrived, but he was consultingfirst with Momus before he admitted his clients. Theywere all complaining at not being allowed to wait insideand having to stand out there in the snow. The weatherwasn't very cold, but still it showed a lack of considera-tion to keep them standing there in front of the house


THE CASTLE

292
in the darkness, perhaps for hours. It was certainly notthe fault of Erlanger, who was always very accom-modating, knew nothing about it, and would certainlybe very annoyed if it were reported to him. Itwas the fault of the Herrenhof landlady, who in herpositively morbid determination to be refined, wouldn'tsuffer a lot of people to come into the Herrenhof at thesame time. “If it absolutely must be and they mustcome," she used to say, “ then in Heaven's name letthem come one at a time.'' And she had managed toarrange that the clients, who at first had waited simplyin a passage, later on the stairs, then in the hall, andfinally in the taproom, were at last pushed out into thestreet. But even that had not satisfied her. It wasunendurable for her to be always “ besieged '', as sheexpressed herself, in her own house. It was incompre-hensible to her why there should need to be clientswaiting at all. “ To dirty the front-door steps," anofficial had once told her, obviously in annoyance, butto her this pronouncement had seemed very illuminat-ing, and she was never tired of quoting it. She triedher best — and she had the approval in this case of theclients too — to get a building set up opposite the Her-renhof where the clients could wait. She would haveliked best of all if the interviews and examinations couldhave taken place outside the Herrenhof altogether, butthe officials opposed that, and when the officials opposedher seriously the landlady naturally enough was unableto gainsay diem, though in lesser matters she exerciseda kind of petty tyranny, thanks to her indefatigable, yetfemininely insinuating zeal. And the landlady wouldprobably have to endure those interviews and examina-tions in the Herrenhof in perpetuity, for the gendemenfrom the Castle refused to budge from the place whenever


THE CASTLE

293
they had official business in the village. They werealways in a hurry, they came to the village much againsttheir will, they had not the slightest intention of pro-longing their stay beyond the time, absolutely necessary,and so they could not be asked, simply for the sake ofmaking things more pleasant in the Herrenhof, to wastetime by transferring themselves with all their papersto some other house. The officials preferred indeedto get through their business in the taproom or in theirrooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bedbefore retiring for the night, or in the morning whenthey were too weary to get up and wanted to stretchthemselves for a little longer. Yet the question of theerection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearinga favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow forthe landlady — people laughed a little over it — that thismatter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerableinterviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house werehardly ever empty. 

The waiting group passed the time by talking in half-whispers about those things. K. was struck by the factthat, though their discontent was general, nobody sawany objection to Erlanger's summoning his clients in themiddle of the night. He asked why this was so andgot the answer that they should be only too thankfulto Erlanger. It was only his goodwill and his highconception of his office that induced him to come tothe village at all, he could easily if he wished — and itwould probably be more in accordance with the regula-tions too — he could easily send an under-secretary andlet him draw up statements. Still, he usually refusedto do this, he wanted to see and hear everything forhimself, but for this purpose he had to sacrifice hisnights, for in his official time-table there was no time


THE CASTLE

294
allowed for journeys to the village. K. objected thateven Klamm came to the village during the day andeven stayed for several days ; was Erlanger, then, a meresecretary, more indispensable up there ? One or twolaughed good humouredly, others maintained an em-barrassed silence, the latter gained the ascendancy, andK. received hardly any reply. Only one man repliedhesitatingly, that of course Klamm was indispensable,in the Castle as in the village. 

Then the front door opened and Momus appearedbetween two attendants carrying lamps. The firstwho will be admitted to Herr Erlanger,'* he said, " areGerstacker and K. Are these two men here ? " Theyreported themselves, but before they could step forwardJeremiah slipped in with a I'm a waiter here," and,greeted by Momus with a smiling slap on the shoulder,disappeared inside. " I'll have to keep a sharper eyeon Jeremiah," K. told himself, though he was quiteaware at the same time that Jeremiah was probablyfar less dangerous than Arthur who was working againsthim in the Castle. Perhaps it would actually have beenwiser to let himself be annoyed by them as assistants,than to have them prowling about without supervisionand allow them to carry on their intrigues in freedom,intrigues for which they seemed to have special facilities. 

As K. was passing Momus the latter started as if onlynow did he recognise in him the Land Surveyor. " Ah,the Land Surveyor ? " he said. " The man who was sounwilling to be examined and now is in a hurry to beexamined. It would have been simpler to let me do itthat time. Well, really it's difficult to choose the righttime for a hearing." Since at these words K. made tostop, Momus went on : "Go in, go in ! I needed youranswers then, I don't now." Nevertheless K. replied,


THE CASTLE

295
provoked by Momus's tone : You only think of your-selves. I would never and will 'never answer merelybecause of someone's office, neither then nor now/'Momus replied : '‘Of whom, th^, should we think ?Who else is there here 1 Look for yourself ! "
In the hall they were met by an attendant who ledthem the old way, already known to K., across the court-yard, then into ihe entry and through the low, somewhatdownward sloping passage. *rhe upper storeys wereevidently reserved only for higher officials, the secre-taries, on the other hand, had their rooms in this passage,even Erlanger himself, although he was one of the highestamong them. The servant put out his lantern, for hereit was brilliant with electric light. Everything was ona small scale, but elegantly finished. The space wavutilised to the best advantage. The passage was justhigh enough for one to walk without bending one's head. 
Along both sides the doors almost touched each other. 
The walls did not quite reach to the ceiling, probablyfor reasons of ventilation, for here in the low cclIar-Iikcpassage the tiny rooms could hardly have windows. 
The disadvantage of those incomplete walls was thatthe passage, and necessarily the rooms as well, werenoisy. Many of the rooms seemed to be occupied, inmost the people were still awake, one could hear voices,hammering, the clink of glasses. But the impressionwas not one of particular gaiety. The voices weremuffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctlymade out, it did not seem to be conversation either,probably someone was only dictating something otreading something aloud ; and precisely from the roomswhere there was a clinking of glasses and plates no wordwas to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. thathe had been told some time or other that certain of


THE CASTLE

296
the officials occupied themselves occasionally with car-pentry, model engines, and so forth, to recuperate fromthe continual strain of mental work. The passage itselfwas empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman ina fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen,who was sitting before one of the doors. Probably ithad become too stuffy for him in the room, so he hadsat down outside and was reading a newspaper, but notvery carefully ; often he yawned and left off reading,then bent forward and glanced along the passage, per-haps he was waiting for a client whom he had invitedand who had omitted to come. When they had passedhim the servant said to Gerstacker : ** That’s Pinz-
gauer.” Gerstacker nodded : ** He hasn’t been downhere for a long time now,” he said. ” Not for a longtime now,” the servant agreed. 

At last they stopped before a door which was not inany way different from the others, and yet behind which,so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. The servantgot K. to lift him on to his shoulders and had a lookinto the room through the open slit. ” He’s lyingdown,” said the servant climbing down, ” on the bed,in his clothes, it’s true, but I fancy all the same that he’sasleep. Often he’s overcome with weariness like that,here in the village, what with the change in his habits. 
We’ll have to wait. When he wakes up he’ll ring. 
Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleepaway all his stay in the village, and then when he woketo have to leave again immediately for the Castle. *It’svoluntary, of course, the work he does here.” ” Thenit would be better if he just slept on,” said Gerstacker,” for when he has a little time left for his work after hewakes, he’s very vexed at having fallen asleep, and triesto get everything settled in a hurry, so that one can


THE CASTLE

297
hardly get a word in." " You’ve come on account ofthe contract for the carting for* the new building ? "asked the servant. Gerstacker nodded, drew the servantaside and talked to him in a low, voice, but the servanthardly listened, gazed away over Gerstacker, whomhe overtopped by more than a head, and stroked hishair slowly and seriously. 


xvin
T hen, as he was looking round aimlessly, K. sawFrieda far away at a turn of the passage ; shebehaved as if she did not recognise him and only staredat him expressionlessly ; she was carr)ang a tray withsome empty dishes in her hand. He said to the servant,who, however, paid no attention whatever to him — themore one talked to the servant the more absent-mindedhe seemed to become — that he would be back in amoment, and ran off to Frieda. Reaching her he tookher by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro-perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questionswith his eyes holding hers. But her rigid bearing hardlyas much as softened, to hide her confusion she tried torearrange the dishes on the tray and said : “ What doyou want from me ? Go back to the others — oh, youknow whom I mean, you’ve just come from them, Ic^ see it." K. changed his tactics immediately ; theexplanation mustn’t come so suddenly, and mustn’tbegin with the worst point, the point most unfavourableto himself. " I thought you were in the taproom,*’ hesaid. Frieda looked at him in amazement and thensoftly passed her free hand over his brow and cheeks. It


THE CASTLE

298
was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and weretrying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had theveiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. 
‘‘ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she saidslowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, butas if beneath her words she were carrying on anotherconversation with K. which was more important — ‘‘ thiswork here is not for me, anybody at all could do it ;anybody who can make beds and look ^ood-naturedand doesn't mind the advances of the boarders, butactually likes them ; anybody who can do that can bea chamber-maid. But in the taproom, that's quitedifferent. I've been taken on straight away for thetaproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leaveit with any great distinction, but, of course, I had aword put in for me. But the landlord was delightedthat I had a word put in for me to make it easy for himto take me on again. It actually ended by them havingto press me to take on the post ; when you reflect whatthe taproom reminds me of you'll understand that. 
Finally I decided to take it on. I'm only here tem-porarily. Pepi begged us not to put her to the shame ofhaving to leave the taproom at once, and seeing thatshe has been willing and has done everything to the bestof her ability, we have given her a twenty-four hours'extension." " That's all very nicely arranged," saidK., " but once you left the taproom for my sake, andnow that we're soon to be married are you going backto it again ? " " There will be no marriage," said
Frieda. " Because I’ve been unfaithful to you ? " askedR. Frieda nodded. " Now, look here, Frieda," saidR., "we’ve often talked already about this allegedunfaithfulness of mine, and every time you've hadto recognise finally that your suspicions were unjust. 



THE CASTLE

299
And since then nothing has changed on my side, allTve done has remained as innocent as it was at first andas it must always remain. So something must havechanged on your side, through the .•suggestions of strangersor in some way or other. You do me an injustice in anycase, for just listen to how I stand with those two girls. 
The one, the dark one — Vm almost ashamed to defendmyself on particular points like this, but you give meno choice — the dark one, then, is probably just as dis-pleasing to me as to you ; I keep my distance with herin every way I can, and she makes it easy, too, no onecould be more retiring than she is/' Yes," criedFrieda, the words slipped out as if against her will, K. 
was delighted to see her attention diverted, she wasnot saying what she had intended — " Yes, you may lookupon her as retiring, you tell me that the most shamelesscreature of them all is retiring, and incredible as it is,you mean it honestly, you're not shamming, I know. 
The Bridge Inn landlady once said of you : * I can’tabide him, but I can't let him alone either, one simplycan't control oneself when one sees a child that canhardly walk trying to go too far for it, one simply hasto interfere.' " " Pay attention to her advice for this
once," said K. smiling, " but that girl — whether she'sretiring or shameless doesn't matter — I don't want tohear any more about her." " But why do you callher retiring ? " asked Frieda obdurately — K. consideredthis interest of hers a favourable sign — " have you foundhef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some-body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," saidK., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makesit easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said evena word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go backagain, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go


THE CASTLE

JOO
there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. Andit's simply for that reason that I have to talk with theother girl, whom I respect, I must admit, for her cap-ability, prudence, anc| unselfishness, but whom nobodycould say was seductive." " The servants are of adiflFerent opinion," said Frieda. ** On that as on lots ofother subjects," said K. " Are you going to deduce myunfaithfulness from the tastes of the servants ? " Friedaremained silent and suffered K. to take the tray fromher, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, andwalk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. 
" You don't know what fidelity is," she said, his nearnessputting her a little on the defensive, what your rela-tions with the girl may be isn't the most importantpoint ; the fact that you go to that house at all andcome back with the smell of their kitchen on your clothesis itself an unendurable humiliation for me. And thenyou rush out of the school without saying a word. Andstay with them, too, the half of the night. And whenyou're asked for, you let those girls deny that you'rethere, deny it passionately, especially the wonderfullyretiring one. And creep out of the house by a secretway, perhaps actually to save the good name of thegirls, the good name of those girls. No, don't let us talkabout it any more." " Yes, don't let us talk of this,"said K., " but of something else, Frieda. Besides, there'snothing more to be said about it. You know why I haveto go there. It isn't easy for me, but I overcome myfeelings. You shouldn't make it any harder for me thanit is. To-night I only thought of dropping in there fora minute to see whether Barnabas had come at last, forhe had an important message which he should havebrought long before. He hadn’t come, but he was boundto come very soon, so I was assured, and it seemed ver)'


THE CASTLE

301
probable too. I didn't want to let him come after me. 
for you to be insulted by his presence. The hours passedand unfortunately he didn't come. But another cameall right, a man whom I hate. J had no intention ofletting myself be spied on by him, so I left through theneighbour's garden, but I didn't want to hide from himeither, and I went up to him frankly when I reachedthe street, with a very good^ and supple hazel switch,I admit. That is all, so there's nothing more to be saidabout it ; 6ut there's plenty to say about somethingelse. What about the assistants, the very mention ofwhose name is as repulsive to me as that family is toyou ? Compare your relations with them with myrelations with that family. I understand your antipathyto Barnabas's family and I can share it. It's only for thesake of my affairs that I go to see them, sometimes italmost seems to me that I'm abusing and exploitingthem. But you and the assistants ! You've never deniedthat they persecute you, and you've admitted that you'reattracted by them. I wasn't angry with you for that,I recognised that powers were at work which youweren't equal to, I was glad enough to see that you putup a resistance at least, I helped to defend you, and justbecause I left off for a few hours, trusting in your con-stancy, trusting also, I must admit, in the hope thattlie house was securely locked and the assistants finallyput to flight — ^I still underestimate them. I'm afraid —just because I left off for a few hours and this Jeremiah— <who is, when you look at him closely, a rather un-healthy elderly creature — had the impudence to go upto the window ; just for this, Frieda, I must lose youand get for a greeting : ' There will be no marriage. 
Shouldn't I be the one to cast reproaches ? But I don t,I have never done so." And once more it seemed advis-


THE CASTLE

302
able to K. to distract Frieda's mind a little, and hebegged her to bring him something to eat for he hadhad nothing since midday. Obviously relieved by therequest, Frieda noddfd and ran to fetch something,not farther along the passage, however, where K. con-jectured the kitchen was, but down a few steps to theleft. In a little she brought a plate with slices of meatand a bottle of wine, but they were clearly only the remainsof a meal, the scraps of meat had been hastily rangedout anew so as to hide the fact, yet whole sausage skinshad been overlooked, and the bottle was three-quartersempty. However, K. said nothing and fell on the foodwith a good appetite. ‘‘You were in the kitchen ? "he asked. “ No, in my own room," she said. “ I havea room down there." ‘‘You might surely have takenme with you," said K. ‘‘ I'll go down now, so as to sitdown for a little while I'm eating." " I'll bring youa chair," said Frieda already making to go. ‘‘ Thanks,"replied K. holding her back, ‘‘ I'm neither going downthere, nor do I need a chair any longer." Frieda enduredhis hand on her arm defiantly, bowed her head and bither lip. ‘‘ Well, then, he is down there," she said, ‘‘ didyou expect anything else ? He's lying on my bed, hegot a cold out there, he's shivering, he's hardly had anyfood. At bottom it's all your fault, if you hadn't driventhe assistants away and run after those people, we mightbe sitting comfortably in the school now. You alonehave destroyed our happiness. Do you think thatJeremiah, so long as he was in service, would have dasedto take me away ? Then you entirely misunderstoodthe way things are ordered here. He wanted me, hetormented himself, he lay in watch for me, but thatwas only a game, like the play of a hungry dog whonevertheless wouldn't dare to leap up on the table. 



THE CASTLE

And just the same with me. 1 was drawn to him, hewas a playmate of mine in my childhood — we playedtogether on the slope of the Castle Hill, a lovely time,you’ve never asked me anything about my past — butall that wasn’t decisive as long as Jeremi^ was heldback by his service, for I knew my duty as your futurewife. But then you drove the assistants away andplumed yourself on it besides, as if you had done some-thing for me by it ; well, in*a certain sense it was true. 
Your plan Ras succeeded as far as Arthur is concerned,but only for the moment, he’s delicate, he hasn’tJeremiah’s passion that nothing can daunt, besides youalmost shattered his health for him by the buffet yougave him that night — it was a blow at my happinessas well — he fled to the Castle to complain, and evenif he comes back soon, he’s gone now all the same. ButJeremiah stayed. When he’s in service he fears theslightest look of his master, but when he’s not in servicethere’s nothing he’s afraid of. He came and took me ;forsaken by you, commanded by him, my old friend,I couldn’t resist. I didn’t unlock the school door. Hesmashed the window and lifted me out. We flew here,the landlord looks up to him, nothing could be morewelcome to the guests, either, than to have such a waiter,so we were taken on, he isn’t living with me, but we arestaying in the same room.” ” In spite of everything,”said K., ” I don’t regret having driven the assistantsfrom our service. If things stood as you say, and yourfuthfulness was only determined by the assistants beingfn the position of servants, then it was a good thing thatit came to an end. The happiness of a married life spentwith two beasts of prey, who could only be kept underby the whip, wouldn’t have been very great. In thatcase I’m even thankful to this family who have uninten-


THE CASTLE

304
tionally had some part in separating us.*' They becamesilent and began to walk backwards and forwards againside by side, though neither this time could have toldwho had made the first move. Close beside him, Friedaseemed annoyed that K. did not take her arm again. 
“ And so everything seems in order," K. went on, ‘^andwe might as well say good-bye, and you go to yourJeremiah, who must have had this chill, it seems, eversince I chased him through' the garden, and whom you'vealready left by himself too long in that case, ‘and I to theempty school, or, seeing that there's no place for methere without you, anywhere else where they'll take mein. If I hesitate still in spite of this, it's because I havestill a little doubt about what you've told me, and withgood reason. I have a different impression of Jeremiah. 
So long as he was in service he was always at your heelsand I don't believe that his position would have heldhim back permanently from making a serious attempton you. But now that he considers that he's absolvedfrom service, it's a different case. Forgive me if I haveto explain myself in this way : Since you're no longerhis master's fiancee, you're by no means such a tempta-tion for him as you used to be. You may be the friendof his childhood, but — I only got to know him reallyfrom a short talk to-night — in my opinion he doesn'tlay much weight on such sentimental considerations. 
I don't know why he should seem a passionate personin your eyes. His mind seems to me on the contrary tobe particularly cold. He received from Galater certaininstructions relating to me, instructions probably ndtvery much in my favour, he exerted himself to carrythem out, with a certain passion for service. I'll admit —it's not so uncommon here — one of them was that heshould wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to


THE CASTLE

505
do it by several means, one of them was to tempt youby his evil languishing glances, another— here the land-lady supported him— was to invent fables about myunfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memoryor other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped,he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just atthe moment when he no longer needed it, then he reapedthe fruit of his labours and lifted you out through theschool window, with that his \ask was finished, and hispassion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored,he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't reallycomplaining up there at all, but earning praise and newcommissions, but someone had to stay behind to followthe further developments of the affair. It's rather aburdensome task to him to have to look after you. Oflove for you he hasn't a trace, he frankly admitted it tome ; as one of Klamm 's sweethearts he of course respectsyou, and to insinuate himself into your bedroom andfeel himself for once a little Klamm certainly gives himpleasure, but that is all, you yourself mean nothing tohim now, his finding a place for you here is only asupplementary part of his main job ; so as not to dis-quieten you he has remained here himself too, but onlyfor the time being, as long as he doesn't get further newsfrom the Castle and his cooling feelings towards youaren't quite cured." " How you slander him ! " saidFrieda, striking her little fists together. " Slander ? "said K., " no, I don't wish to slander him. But I mayquite well perhaps be doing him an injustice, that iscertainly possible. What I've said about him doesn'tlie on the surface for anybody to see, and it may belooked at differently too. But slander ? Slander couldonly have one object, to combat your love for him. Ifihat were necessary and if slander were the most fitting


THE CASTLE

306
means, I wouldn't hesitate to slander him. Nobodycould condemn me for it, his position puts him at suchan advantage as compared with me that, thrown backsolely on my own resources, I could even allow myselfa little slander. It would be a comparatively innocent,but in the last resort a powerless, means of defence. Soput down your fists." And K. took Frieda^s hand inhis ; Frieda tried to draw it away, but smilingly andnot with any great earnestness. " But I don't needslander," said K., " for you don't love htoi, you onlythink you do, and you'll be thankful to me for riddingyou of your illusion. For think, if anybody wanted to takeyou away from me, without violence, but with the mostcareful calculation, he could only do it through the twoassistants. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre-sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle,a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all thatof course must have seemed very nice, especially whenI was the antithesis of it all, and was always runningafter affairs moreover which were scarcely compre-hensible, which were exasperating to you, and whichthrew me together with people whom you considereddeserving of your hate — something of which you carriedover to me too, in spite of all my innocence. The wholething was simply a wicked but very clever exploitationof the failings in our relationship. Everybody's relationshave their blemishes, even ours, we came together fromtwo very different worlds, and since we have knowneach other the life of each of us has had to be quitedifferent, we still feel insecure, it's all too new. I don'tspeak of myself, I don't matter so much, in reality I’vebeen enriched from the very first moment that youlooked on me, and to accustom oneself to one’s richesisn't very difficult. But — not to speak of anything else


THE CASTLE

307
—you were torn away from Klamm, I can't calculatehow much that must have meant, but a vague idea ofit Ive managed to arrive at gradually, you stumbled,you couldn't find yourself, and ^ven if I was alwaysready to help you, still I wasn't always there, and whenI was there you were held captive by your dreams orby something more palpable, the landlady, say— in shortthere were times when you^ turned away from me,longed, poor^ child, for vague inexpressible things, andat those periods any passable man had only to comewithin your range of vision and you lost yourself to him. 
succumbing to the illusion that mere fancies of themoment, ghosts, old memories, things of the past andthings receding ever more into the past, life that hadonce been lived — that all this was your actual present-day life. A mistake, Frieda, nothing more than thelast and, properly regarded, contemptible difficultiesattendant on our final reconciliation. Come to yourself,gather yourself together ; even if you thought that theassistants were sent by Klamm — it's quite untrue, theycome from Galater — and even if they did manage bythe help of this illusion to charm you so completely thateven in their disreputable tricks and their lewdness youthought you found traces of Klamm, just as one fanciesone catches a glimpse of some precious stone that onehas lost in a dung-heap, while in reality one wouldn'tbe able to find it even if it were there — all the samethey're only hobbledehoys like the servants in the stall,except that they're not healthy like them, and a littlefresh air makes them ill and compels them to take totheir beds, which I must say that they know how tosnuffle out with a servant's true cunning." Frieda hadlet her head fall on K.'s shoulder ; their arms roundeach other, they walked silently up and down. If


THE CASTLE

308
we had only," said Frieda after a while, slowly, quietly,almost serenely, as if she knew that only a quite shortrespite of peace on K/s shoulder were reserved for her,and she wanted to enjoy it to the utmost, " if we hadonly gone away somewhere at once that night, we mightbe in peace now, always together, your hand always nearenough for mine to grasp ; oh, how much I ne^ yourcompanionship, how lost J have felt without it ever sinceTve known you, to have your company,^ believe me,is the only dream that I've had, that and nothing else."
Then someone called from the side passage, it wasJeremiah, he was standing there on the lowest step, hewas in his shirt, but had thrown a wrap of Frieda'sround him. As he stood there, his hair rumpled, histhin beard lank as if dripping with wet, his eyes pain-fully beseeching and wide with reproach, his sallowcheeks flushed, but yet flaccid, his naked legs tremblingso violently with cold that the long fringes of the wrapquivered as well, he was like a patient who had escapedfrom hospital, and whose appearance could only suggestone thought, that of getting him back in bed again. 
This in fact was the effect that he had on Frieda, shedisengaged herself from K., and was down beside Jere-miah in a second. Her nearness, the solicitude withwhich she drew the wrap closer round him, the hastewith which she tried to force him back into the room,seemed to give him new strength, it was as if he onlyrecognised K. now. " Ah, the Land Surveyor ! " hesaid, stroking Frieda's cheek to propitiate her, for^jhedid not want to let him talk any further, " forgive theinterruption. But I'm not at all well, that must be myexcuse. I think I'm feverish, I must drink some tea andget a sweat. Those damned railings in the school garden,they 11 give me something to think about yet, and then,


THE CASTLE

309
already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all nightafterwards. One sacrifices one's health for things notreally worth it, without noticing it at the time. Butyou, Land Surveyor, mustn't let yourself be disturbedby me, come into the room here with us, pay me asick visit, and at the same time tell Frieda whateveryou have still to say to her. When two who are accus-tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they havea great deal to say to each other at the last minute whicha third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for histea to come, can't possibly understand. But do comein. I'll be perfectly quiet." " That's enough, enough ! "said Frieda pulling at his arm. " He's feverish and'doesn't know what he's saying. But you, K., don't youcome in here, I beg you not to. It's my room andJeremiah's, or rather it's my room and mine alone,I forbid you to come in with us. You always persecuteme ; oh, K,, why do you always persecute me ? Never,never will I go back to you, I shudder when I think ofthe very possibility. Go back to your girls ; they sitbeside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts,I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch youthey spit at him. You must feel at home there, sincethe place attracts you so much. I've always tried tokeep you from going there, with little success, but allthe same I've tried ; all that's past now, you are free. 
You've a lovely life in front of you ; for the one you'llperhaps have to squabble a little with the servants, butas for the other, there's nobody in heaven or earth thatwill grudge you her. The union is blessed beforehand. 
Don't deny it, I know you can disprove anything, butin the end nothing is disproved. Only think, Jeremiah,he has disproved everything I " They nodded with asmile of mutual understanding. " But,' Frieda went


THE CASTLE

310
on, “ even if everything were disproved, what wouldbe gained by that, what would it matter to me ? Whathappens in that house is purely their business and hisbusiness, no tmine. ^Mine is to nurse you till you'rewell again, as you were at one time, before K. tormentedyou for my sake." " So you're not coming in afterall. Land Surveyor ? " asked Jeremiah, but was nowdefinitely dragged away by Frieda, who did not eventurn to look at K. again. There was a little door downthere, still lower than the doors in the ‘passage — notJeremiah only, even Frieda had to stoop on entering —within it seemed to be bright and warm, a few whisperswere audible, probably loving cajolements to getJeremiah to bed, then the door was closed. 


Here the text of the first German edition of The Castleends. It has been translated by
WiLLA AND Edwin Muir. 

What follows is the continuation of the text together withadditional material (different versions, fragments, passagesdeleted by the author, etc,^ as found among Kafka* s papers afterthe publication of the first edition and included by the editor. 
Max Brod, in the definitive German edition. The translationIS by
Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser

Only now did K. notice how quiet it had become in thepassage, not only here in this part of tlie passage where


THE CASTLE

311
he had been with Frieda, and which seemed to belongto the public rooms of the inn, but also in the longpassage with the rooms that had earlier been so full ofbustle. So the gentlemen had gonf to sleep at last afterall. K. too was very tired, perhaps it was from fatiguethat he had not stood up to Jeremiah as he should have. 
It would perhaps have been more prudent to take hiscue from Jeremiah, who was obviously exaggerating howbad his chill was — his woefulness was not caused by hishaving a chill, it was congenital and could not berelieved by any herbal tea — to take his cue entirely fromJeremiah, make a similar display of his own really greatfatigue, sink down here in the passage, which would initself afford much relief, sleep a little, and then perhapsbe nursed a little too. Only it would not have workedout as favourably as with Jeremiah, who would certainlyhave won this competition for sympathy, and rightly so,probably, and obviously every other fight too. K. wasso tired that he wondered whether he might not try togo into one of these rooms, some of which were stue tobe empty, and have a good sleep in a luxurious bed. Inhis view this might turn out to be recompense for manythings. He also had a night-cap handy. On the traythat Frieda had left on the floor there had been a smalldecanter of rum. K. did not shrink from the exertion ofmaking his way back, and he drained the little bottle tothe dregs. 

Now he at least felt strong enough to go beforeErlanger. He looked for the door of Erlanger's room,but since the servant and Gerstacker were no longer tobe seen and all the doors looked alike, he could not findit. Yet he believed he remembered more or less in whatpart of the passage the door had been, and decided toopen a door that in his opinion was probably the one he


THE CASTLE

312
was looking for. The experiment could not be so verydangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr woulddoubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room itwould still be possible to apologise and go away again,and if the inmate was asleep, which was what wasprobable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ;it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, forthen K. would scarcely be able to resist the temptationto get into the bed and sleep for ages. He once moreglanced along the passage to right and to left, to seewhether after all there might not be somebody comingwho would be able to give him some information andmake the venture unnecessary, but the long passage wasquiet and empty. Then K. listened at the door. Heretoo was no inmate. He knocked so quietly that it couldnot have wakened a sleeper, and when even now nothinghappened he opened the door very cautiously indeed. 
But now he was met with a faint scream. 

It was a small room, more than half filled by a widebed, on the night-table the electric lamp was burning,beside it was a travelling handbag. In the bed, butcompletely hidden under the quilt, someone stirreduneasily and whispered through a gap between quilt andsheet : Who is it ? Now K, could not withdrawagain so easily, discontentedly he surveyed the voluptuousbut unfortunately not empty bed, then remembered thequestion and gave his name. This seemed to have agood effect, the man in the bed pulled the quilt a littleoff his face, anxiously ready, however, to cover himselfup again completely if something was not quite all rightout there. But then he flung back the quilt withoutqualms and sat up. It was certainly not Erlanger. Itwas a small, well-looking gentleman whose face had accruin contradictoriness in it in that the cheeks were


THE CASTLE

JI3
chubby as a child's and the eyes merry as a child's, butrhat the high forehead, the pointed nose, the narrowmouth, the lips of which would scarcely remain closed,the almost vanishing chin, were not like a child's at all,but revealed superior intellect. It was doubtless hissatisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, thathad preserved in him a marked residue of somethinghealthily childlike. ‘‘Do you know Friedrich?" heasked. K. said he did not. But he knows you," thegentleman said, smiling. K. nodded, there was no lackof people who knew him, this was indeed one of themain obstacles in his way. " I am his secretary," the^gentleman said, ‘‘ my name is Biirgel.'' " Excuse me,"K. said, reaching for the door-handle, ** I am sorry, Imistook your door for anotlier. The fact is I liavc beensummoned to Secretary Erlanger." " What a pity,"Burgel said. " Not that you are summoned elsewhere,but that you made a mistake about the doors. The factis once I am wakened I am quite certain not to go tosleep again. Still, that need not sadden you so much, it'smy personal misfortune. Why, anyway, can't thesedoors be locked, eh ? There's a reason for that, of course. 
Because, according to an old saying, the secretaries' doorssliould always be open. But that, again, need not betaken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly andmerrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemedthoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never inhis life been as tired as K. was now. " Where do youthink of going now ? " Burgel asked. " It's four o'clock. 
Anyone to whom you might think of going you wouldhave to wake, not everybody is as used to being disturbedas I am, not everyone will put up with it as tolerantly,the secretaries are a nervous species. So stay for a littlewhile. Round about five o'clock people here begin to


THE CASTLE

314
get up, then you will be best able to answer yoursummons. So please do let go of the door-handle nowand sit down somewhere, granted there isn’t overmuchroom here, it will be^ best if you sit here on the edge ofthe bed. You are surprised that I should have neitherchair nor table here ? Well, I had the choice of gettingeither a completely furnished room with a narrow hotelbed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash-stand. I chose the big bed, after all, in a bedroom thebed is undoubtedly the main thing ! AK, for anyonewho could stretch out and sleep soundly, for a soundsleeper, this bed would surely be truly delicious. Buteven for me, perpetually tired as I am without being ableto sleep, it is a blessing, I spend a large part of the day init, deal with all my correspondence in it, here conduct allthe interviews with applicants. It works quite well. 
Of course the applicants have nowhere to sit, but theyget over that, and after all it’s more agreeable for themtoo if they stand and the recorder is at ease than if theysit comfortably and get barked at. So the only place Ihave to offer is this here on the edge of the bed, but thatis not an official place and is only intended for nocturnalconversations. But you are so quiet. Land Surveyor ? "I am very tired,” said K., who on receiving theinvitation had instantly, rudely, without respect, satdown on the bed and leaned against the post. ” Ofcourse,” Biirgel said, laughing, ” everybody is tired here. 
The work, for instance, that I got through yesterdayand have already got through even to-day is no smallmatter. It’s completely out of the question of coursethat I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterlyimprobable thing should happen after all and I shouldgo to sleep while you are still here, then please stayquiet and don't open the door, either. But don’t worrjs


THE CASTLE

315
I shall certainly not go to sleep or at best only for a fewminutes. The way it is with me is that probably becauseI am so very used to dealing with applicants I do actuallytind it easiest to go to sleep when I have company.''‘'Do go to sleep, please do, Mr. * Secretary, K. said,pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with yourpermission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said,laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merelyon being invited to do so, it s only in the course ofconversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's mostlikely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. Yes,one's nerves suffer in our business. I, for instance, am a, liaison secretary. You don't know what that is? Well,
I constitute the strongest liaison " — here he hastilyrubbed his hands in involuntary merriment — " betweenFriedrich and the village, I constitute the liaison betweenhis Castle and village secretaries, am mostly in thevillage, but not permanently ; at every moment I musthe prepared to drive up to the Castle. You see thetravelling-bag — a restless life, not suitable for everyone. 
On the other hand it is true that now I could not dowithout this kind of work, all other work would seeminsipid to me. And how do things stand with the land-surveying ? " "I am not doing any such work, J amnot being employed as a Land Surveyor," K. said, he wasnot really giving his mind to the matter, actually he wasonly yearning for Burgel to fall asleep, but even thiswas only out of a certain sense of duty towards himself,in^his heart of hearts he was sure that the moment whenBurgel would go to sleep was still infinitely remote. 
“ That is amazing," Burgel said with a lively jerk of hishead, and pulled a note-pad out from under the quilt inorder to make a note. "You are a Land Surveyor andhave no land-surveying to do." K. nodded mechanically,


THE CASTLE

316
he had stretched out his left arm along the top of thebed-post and laid his head on it, he had already triedvarious ways of making himself comfortable, but thisposition was the most comfortable of all, and now, too,he could attend a little better to what Biirgel was saying. 
'' I am prepared,** Biirgel continued, to follow up thismatter further. With us here things are quite certainljnot in such a way that an expert employee should be lefiunused. And it must after all be painful to you tooDoesn't it cause you distress ? ** It causes ’me distress,*K. said slowly and smiled to himself, for just now it wainot distressing him in the least. Besides, Burgel's offermade little impression on him. It was utterly dilettante. 
Without knowing anything of the circumstances under'which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficultiesthat it encountered in the community and at the Castle,of the complications that had already occurred during K.*ssojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowinganything of all this, indeed without even showing, whatshould have been expected of a secretary as a matter ofcourse, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, heoffered to settle the whole affair up there in no time atall with the aid of his little note-pad. ** You seem tohave had some disappointments,'* Biirgel said, by thisremark showing that he had after all some knowledge ofhuman nature, and indeed, since entering the room, K. 
had from time to time reminded himself not to under-estimate Biirgel, but in his state it was difficult to forma fair judgment of anything but his own weariness. 

No," Biirgel said, as if he were answering a thought ofK.'s and were considerately trying to save him the effortof formulating it aloud. "You must not let yourselfbe frightened off by disappointments. Much here doesseem to be arranged in such a way as to frighten people


THE CASTLE

317
ofF, and when one is newly arrived here the obstaclesdo appear to be completely unsurmountable. I don'twant to enquire into what all this really amounts to,perhaps the appearance does really correspond to thereality, in my position I lack the right detachment tocome to a conclusion about that, but pay attention,there are sometimes after all opportunities that are almostnot in accord with the general situation, opportunities inwhich by means of a word, a glance, a sign of trust, morecan be achieved than by means of lifelong exhaustingefforts. Indeed, that is how it is. But, then again, ofcourse, these opportunities are in accord with the general^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. Butwhy then are they never made use of? I ask time andagain.'* K. did not know why ; he did certainly realisethat what Biirgel was talking about probably concernedhim closely, but he now felt a great dislike of everythingthat concerned him, he shifted his head a little to oneside as though in this manner he were making way forBurgel's questions and could no longer be touched bythem. “It is," Biirgel continued, stretching his armsand yawning, which was in bewildering contradiction tothe gravity of his words, “it is a constant complaintof the secretaries that they are compelled to carry outmost of the village interrogations by night. But why dothey complain of this ? Because it is too strenuous forthem ? Because they would rather spend the nightsleeping ? No, that is certainly not wliat they complainof Among the secretaries there are of course those whoare hard-working and those who are less hard-working,as everywhere ; but none of them complains of excessiveexertion, and least of all in public. That is simply notour way. In this respect we make no distinction betweenordinary time and working-time. Such distinctions are


THE CASTLE

318
alien to us. But what then have the secretaries got againstthe night interrogations ? Is it perhaps consideration forthe applicants ? No, no, it is not that either. Wherethe applicants are cqncerned the secretaries are ruthless,admittedly not a jot more ruthless than towards them-selves, but merely precisely as ruthless. Actually thisruthlessness is, when you come to think of it, nothingbut a rigid obedience to and execution of their duty, thegreatest consideration that the applicants can really wishfor. And this is at bottom — granted, ' a superficialobserver does not notice this — completely recognised ;indeed, it is, for instance in this case, precisely . thenight interrogations that are welcomed by the applicants,no objections in principle come in regarding the nightinterrogations. Why then nevertheless the secretaries'dislike ? This K. did not know either, he knew solittle, he could not even distinguish where Biirgel wasseriously or only apparently expecting an answer. ‘ Ifyou let me lie down in your bed,' he thought, ‘ I shallanswer all your questions for you at noon to-morrow or,better still, to-morrow evening.' But Biirgel did notseem to be paying any attention to him, he was far toomuch occupied with the question that he had put tohimself; So far as I can see and so far as my ownexperience takes me, the secretaries have the followingqualms regarding the night interrogations : the night isless suitable for negotiations with applicants for thereason that by night it is difficult or positively impossiblecompletely to preserve the officii character of •> thenegotiations. This is not a matter of externals, the formscan of course, if desired, be just as strictly observed bynight as by day. So it is not that, on the other liand theofficial power of judgment suffers at night. One tendsinvoluntarily to judge things from a more private point


THE CASTLE

319
of view at night, the allegations of the applicants rakeon more weight than is due to them, the judgment of thecase becomes adulterated with quite irrelevant con-siderations of the rest of the applicants' situation, theirsufferings and anxieties, the necessary barrier betweenthe applicants and the officials, even though externallyit may be impeccably maintained, weakens, and whereotherwise, as is proper, only questions and answers areexchanged, what sometimes seems to take place is anodd, wholly linsuitable changing of places between thepersons. This at least is what the secretaries say, andthey are of course the people who, through their vocation,(are endowed with a quite extraordinary subtlety of feelingin such matters. But even they — and this has oftenbeen discussed in our circles — notice little of thoseunfavourable influences during the night interrogations ;on the contrary, they exert themselves right from thebeginning to counteract them and end up by believingthey have achieved quite particularly good results. If,however, one reads the records through afterwards oneis often amazed at their obvious and glaring weaknesses. 
And these are defects, and, what is more, ever and againmean half- unjustified gains for the applicants, whichat least according to our regulations cannot be repairedby the usual direct method. Quite certainly they will atsome later time be corrected by a control-office, but thiswill only profit the law, but will not be able to damagethat applicant any more. Are the complaints of thesecretaries under such circumstances not thoroughlyjustified ? " K. had already spent a little while sunk inhalf-sleep, but now he was roused again. ‘ Why allthis T Why all this ? ' he wondered, and from underlowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an officialdiscussing difficult questions with him, but only like


THE CASTLE

320
something that was preventing him from sleeping andwhose further meaning he could not discover. ButBiirgel, wholly abandoned to the pursuit of his thoughts,smiled, as though had just succeeded in misleadingK. a little. Yet he was prepared to bring him backon to the right road immediately. " Well," he said," on the other hand one cannot simply go and call thesecomplaints quite justified, either. The night interroga-tions are, indeed, nowhere actually prescribed by theregulations, so one is not offending against any regulationif one tries to avoid them, but conditions, the excess ofwork, the way the officials are occupied in the Castle, howindispensable they are, the regulation that the interroga-tion of applicants is to take place only after the finalconclusion of all the rest of the investigation, but theninstantly, all this and much else has after all made thenight interrogations an indispensable necessity. But ifnow they have become a necessity — this is what I say—this is nevertheless also, at least indirectly, a result of theregulations, and to find fault with the nature of the nightinterrogations would then almost mean — I am, of course,exaggerating a little, and only since it is an exaggerationcan I utter it, as such — would then indeed mean findingfault with the regulations. 

" On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre-taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguardthemselves, within the terms of the regulations, againstthe night interrogations and their perhaps only apparentdisadvantages. This is in fact what they do, and inydeedto the greatest extent. They permit only subject^ ofnegotiation from which there is in every sense as littleas possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior tonegotiations and, if the result of the test demands it,even at the very last moment cancel all examinations,


THE CASTLE

321
Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant oftenas many as ten times before really dealing with him, havea liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagueswho are not competent to deal wifh the given case andw ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedulethe negotiations at least for the beginning or the end ofthe night, avoiding the middle hours, there are manymore such meastures, the secretaries are not the people tolet anyone get the better of them so easily, they arealmost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. was asleep,it w'as not real sleep, he could hear Biirgers wordsperhaps better than during his former dead-tired state ofwaking, word after word struck his ear, but the tiresomeconsciousness had gone, he felt free, it w^as no longerBiirgel who held him, only he still sometimes gropedtowards Biirgel, he was not yet in the depths of sleep, butimmersed in it he certainly was. No one should deprivehim of that now. And it seemed to him as though withthis he had achieved a great victory and already there wasa party of people there to celebrate it, and he or perhapssomeone else raised the champagne glass in lionour ofthis victory. And so that all should know what it wasall about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated onceagain or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook placenow^ and had already been celebrated earlier and therewas no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately theoutcome was certain. A secretary, naked, very like thestatue of a Greek god, was hard pressed by K. in theIt was very funny and K. in his sleep smiledgently about how the secretary was time and againstartled out of his proud attitude by K.*s assaults andwould hastily have to use his raised arm and clenchedfist to cover unguarded parts of his body and yet wasalways too slow in doing so. The fight did not last long
II


THE CASTLE

322
Step lor step, and they were very big steps, K. advanced*Was it a fight at all ? There was no serious obstacle,only now and then a squeak from the secretary. ThisGreek god squeaked like a girl being tickled. Andfinally he was gone, K. was alone in a large room, readyfor battle he turned round, looking for his opponent ;but there was no longer anyone there, the company hadalso scattered, only the fhampagne glass lay broken onthe floor, K. trimpled it to smithereens. But thesplinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again,he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Never-theless, at the sight of Burgers bare chest a thought thatwas part his dream brushed his awareness : Here youhave your Greek god I Go on, haul him out of bed !
There is, however,*' Btirgel said, his face thoughtfullytilted towards the ceiling, as though he were searchinghis memory for examples, but without being able tofind any, ** there is, however, nevertheless, in spite of allprecautionary measures, a way in which it is possible forthe applicants to exploit this nocturnal weakness of thesecretaries — always assuming that it is a weakness — totheir own advantage. Admittedly, a very rare possibility,or, rather, one that almost never occurs. It consists inthe applicant's coming unannounced in the middle ofthe night. You marvel, perhaps, that this, although itseems to be so obvious, should happen so very seldom. 
Well, yes, you are not familiar with conditions here. 
But even you must, I suppose, have been struck by thefoolproofness of the official organisation. Now fromrthisfoolproofness it does result that everyone who has anypetition or who must be interrogated in any matter forother reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeedeven before he has worked the matter out for himself,more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias


THE CASTLE

32?
already received the summons. He is not yet questionedthis time, usually not yet questioned, the matter hasusually not yet reached that stage, but he has thesummons, he can no longer come ytiannounced, at besthe can come at the wrong time, well, then ail thatliappens is that his attention is drawn to the date andrhe hour of the summons, and if he then comes back atrhe right time he is as a rule s^^nt away, that no longercauses any difficulty ; having the summons in theapplicant’s hand and the case noted in the files arc, it istrue, not always adequate, but, nevertheless, powerfuldefensive weapons for the secretaries. This refersadmittedly only to the secretary in whose competencethe matter happens to lie ; it v\'Ould still, of course, beopen to every^one to approach the others in the night,taking them by surprise. Yet this is something scarcelyanj’one will do, it is almost senseless. First of all itw’ould mean greatly annoying the competent secretary. 
We secretaries are, it is true, by no means jealous ofeach other with regard to work, as everyone carries fartoo great a burden of work, a burden that is piled onhim truly without stint, but in dealing with theapplicants we simply must not tolerate any interferencewith our sphere of competence. Many a one before nowhas lost the game because, thinking he was not makingprogress with the competent authority, he tried to slipthrough by approaching some other, one not competent. 
Such attempts must, besides, fail also because of thefacfr that a non-competent secretary, even when he istaken unawares at dead of night and has the best will tohelp, precisely as a consequence of his non-competencecan scarcely intervene any more cfiectively than the nextbest lawyer, indeed at bottom much less so, for what helacks, of course — even if otherwise he could do something,


THE CASTLE

324
since after all he knows the secret paths of the lawbetter than all these legal gentry — concerning thingswith regard to which he is not competent, what he lacliis quite simply time,, he hasn't a moment to spare for it. 
So who then, the prospects being such, would spend hisnights playing the non-competent secretary ? Indeed, theapplicants are in any case fully occupied if, besidescarrying out their normal duties, they wish to respond tothe summonses and hints from the competent authorities,’ fully occupied ' that is to say in the sense in which itconcerns the applicants, which is, of course, far frombeing the same as * fully occupied ' in the sense in whichit concerns the secretaries." K. nodded, smiling, hebelieved he now understood everything perfectly ; notbecause it concerned him, but because he was nowconvinced he would fall fast asleep in the next fewminutes, this time without dreaming or being disturbed ;between the competent secretaries on the one hand andthe non-competent on the other, and confronted with thecrowd of fully occupied applicants, he would sink intodeep sleep and in this way escape everything. Burgel'squiet, self-satisfied voice, which was obviously doing itsbest to put its owner to sleep, was something he had nowbecome so used to that it would do more to put him tosleep than to disturb him. ‘ Clatter, mill, clatter on andon,' he thought, ' you clatter just for me.' " Wherethen, now," Biirgel said, fidgeting at his underlip withtwo fingers, with widened eyes, craning neck, rather asthough after a strenuous long walk he were approaching adelightful view, " where then, now, is that previouslymentioned, rare possibility that almost never occurs ?The secret lies in the regulations regarding competence. 
The fact is things are not so constituted, and in such alarge living organisation cannot be so constituted, that


THE CASTLE

J^5
there is only one definite secretary competent to dealwith each case. It is rather that one is competent aboveall others, but many others are in certain respects, eventhough to a smaller degree, also competent. Who, even■if he were the hardest of workers, could keep together onhis desk, single-handed, all the aspects of even the mostminor incident? Even what I have been saying aboutthe competence above all others ^s saying too much. Foris not the whole competence contained even in thesmallest ? not what is decisive here the passion withwhich the case is tackled ? And is this not always thesame, always present in full intensity ? In all thingsthere may be distinctions among the secretaries, and thereare countless such distinctions, but not in the passion ;none of them will be able to restrain himself if it isdemanded of him that he shall concern himself with acase in regard to which he is competent if only in thesmallest degree. Outwardly, indeed, an orderly mode ofnegotiation must be established, and so it comes aboutthat a particular secretary comes into the foreground foreach applicant, one they have, officially, to keep to. 
This, however, does not even need to be the one who ism the highest degree competent in regard to the case,what is decisive here is the organisation and its particularneeds of the moment. That is the general situation. 
And now. Land Surveyor, consider the possibility thatthrough some circumstances or other, in spite of theobstades already described to you, which are in generalquite sufficient, an applicant does nevertheless, in themiddle of the night, surprise a secretary who has acertain degree of competence with regard to the givencase. I dare say you have never thought of such apossibility ? I am quite prepared to believe it. Nor is itat all necessary to think of it, for it does, after all,


THE CASTLE

326
praaically never occur. What sort of oddly and quitespecially constituted, small, skilful grain would such anapplicant have to be in order to slip through the incompar-able sieve ? You think it cannot happen at all ? You areright, it cannot happen at all. But some night — for whocan vouch for everything ? — it does happen. Admittedly,I don*t know anyone among my acquaintances to whomit has ever happened, well, it is true that proves verylittle, the circle of my acquaintances is restricted incomparison to the number involved here, an'd besides it isby no means certain that a secretary to whom such .1thing has happened will admit it, since it is, after all, avery personal affair and one that in a sense gravely touchesthe official sense of shame. Nevertheless my experiencedocs perhaps prove that what we are concerned with is amatter so rare, actually only existing by way of rumour,not confirmed by anything else at all, that there is,therefore, really no need to be afraid of it. Even if it werereally to happen, one can — one would think — positivelyrender it harmless by proving to it, which is very easy,that there is no room for it in this world. In any caseIt is morbid to be so afraid of it that on * hides, say, underthe quilt and does not dare to peep out. And even ifthis perfect improbability should suddenly have taken onshape, is then everything lost ? On the contrary. Thateverything should be lost is yet more improbable thanthe most improbable thing itself. Granted, if theapplicant is actually in the room things are in a very^ badway. It constricts the heart, * How long will yow beable to put up resistance ? ' one wonders. But it wiirbeno resistance at all, one knows that. You must onlypicture the situation correctly. The never-beheld, always-expected applicant, truly thirstingly expected and alwa)\sreasonably regarded as out of reach — there this applicant


THE CASTLE

327
sits. By his mute presence, if by nothing else, he con-stitutes an invitation to penetrate into his poor life, tolook around there as in one’s own property and there tosuffer with him under the weight of his futile demands. 
This invitation in the silent night is beguiling. One givesway to it, and now one has actually ceased to function inone’s official capacity. It is a situation in which it very^soon becomes impossible to refuse to do a favour. Toput it precisely, one is desperate ; to put it still moreprecisely, onS is very happy. Desperate, for the defence-less position in which one sits here waiting for theapplicant to utter his plea and knowing that once it isuttered one must grant it, even if, at least in so far as onehas oneself a general view of the situation, it positivelytears the official organisation to shreds : this is, Isuppose, the worst thing that can happen to one in thefulfilment of one’s duties. Above all — apart from every-thing else — because it is also a promotion, one surpassingall conceptions, that one here for the moment usurps. 
For it is inherent in our position that we are not em-powered to grant pleas such as that with which we archere concerned, yet through the proximity of thisnocturnal applicant our official powers do in a manner ofspeaking grow, we pledge ourselves to do things that arcoutside our scope ; indeed, we shall even fulfil ourpledges. The applicant wrings from us in the night, asthe robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we shouldotherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the\v3L)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen-ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and whileeverything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; buthow it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, satedand carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are,alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official


THE CASTLE

328
power — that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless,wc are happy. How suicidal happiness can be I Wemight, of course, exert ourselves to conceal the trueposition from the applicant. He himself will scarcelynotice anything of his own accord. He has, after all, inhis own opinion probably only for some indifferent,accidental reasons — being overtired, disappointed, ruth-less and indifferent from ^over-fatigue and disappointment— pushed his way into a room other than the one hewanted to enter, he sits there in ignorance, occupied withhis thoughts, if he is occupied at all, with his mistake orwith his fatigue. Could one not leave him in thatsituation ? One cannot. With the loquacity of thosewho are happy one has to explain everything to him. 
Without being able to spare oneself in the slightest onemust show him in detail what has happened and for whatreasons this has happened, how extraordinarily rare andhow uniquely great the opportunity is, one must showhow the applicant, though he has stumbled into thisopportunity in utter helplessness such as no other beingis capable of than precisely an applicant, can, however,now, if he wants to. Land Surveyor, dominate everythingand to that end has to do nothing but in some way orother put forward his plea, for which fulfilment is alreadywaiting, which indeed it is already coming to meet, allthis one must show ; it is the official’s hour of travail. 
But when one has done even that, then, Land Surveyor,all that is essential has been done, then one must resignoneself and wait.’' ^
K. was asleep, impervious to all that was happening. 
His head, which had at first been lying on his left armon top of the bedpost, had slid down as he slept and nowhung unsupported, slowly drooping lower ; the supportof the arm above was no longer sufficient ; involuntarily


THE CASTLE

3^9
K. provided himself with new support by planting hisright hand firmly against the quilt, whereby he accident-ally took hold of Burgers foot, which happened to besticking up under the quilt. Biiigel looked down andabandoned the foot to him, tiresome though this mightbe. 

Now there came some vigorous knocking on thepartition wall. K. started upland looked at the wall. 

Isn't the Land Surveyor there ? " a voice asked. ** Yes,"Biirgel said,*frecd his foot from K.'s hold and suddenlystretched wildly and wantonly like a little hoy. " Thentell him it’s high time for him to come over here," thevoice continued ; there was no consideration show'n forBiirgel or for whether he might still require K.'s presence. 
" It's Erlanger," Biirgel said in a whisper, seeming notat all surprised that Erlanger w'as in the next room. " Goto him at once, he's already annoyed, try to conciliatehim. He's a sound sleeper ; but still, we have beentalking too loudly ; one cannot control oneself and one'svoice when one is speaking of certain things. Well, goalong now, you don't seem able to shake yourself out ofyour sleep. Go along, what are you still doing here 7No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, whyshould you 7 One's physical energies last only to acertain limit. Who can help the fact that precisely thislimit is significant in other ways too ? No, nobody canhelp it. That is how the world itself corrects thedeviations in its course and maintains the balance. Thisis indeed an excellent, time and again unimaginablyexcellent arrangement, even if in other respects dism dand cheerless. Well, go along, I don't know why you lookat me like that. If you delay much longer Erlanger willbe down on me, and that is something I should very muchlike to avoid. Go along now. Who knows what awaits


THE CASTLE

330
you over there ? Ever)Thing here is full of opportunities,after all. Only there are, of course, opportunities thatare, in a manner of speaking, too great to be made use of,there are things that ^are wrecked on nothing but them-selves. Yes, that is astonishing. For the rest, I hope Ishall now be able to get to sleep for a while after all. 
Of course, it is five o'clock by now and the noise willsoon be beginning. If ypu would only go ! "
Stunned by being suddenly waked up out of deepsleep, still boundlessly in need of sleep, his* body achingall over from having been in such an uncomfortableposition, K. could for a long time not bring himself tostand up, but held his forehead and looked down at hislap. Even Burgel's continual dismissals would not havebeen able to make him go, it was only a sense of the utteruselessness of staying any longer in this room that slowlybrought him to it. How indescribably dreary this roomseemed to him. Whether it had become so or had beenso all the time, he did not know. Here he would noteven succeed in going to sleep again. This convictionwas indeed the decisive factor ; smiling a little at this, herose, supporting himself wherever he K)und any support,on the bed,' on the wall, on the door, and, as though hehad long ago taken leave of Btirgel, left without sayinggoodbye. 


XIX
P ROBABLY he would have walked past Erlanger'sroom just as indilFerently if Erlanger had not beenstanding in the open door, beckoning to him. One shortsign with the forefinger. Erlanger was already completel}’


THE CASTLE

331
dressed to go out, he wore a black fur coat with a tightcollar buttoned up high. A servant was just handing himhis gloves and was still holding a fur cap. ‘‘ You shouldhave come long ago," Erlanger said. K. tried toapologise. Wearily shutting his eyes, Erlanger indicatedthat he was not interested in hearing apologies. " Thematter is as follows," he said. " Formerly a certainFrieda was employed in the ta^-room ; I only know hername, I don't know the girl herself, she is no concern ofmine. ThiS Frieda sometimes served Klamm with beer. 
Now there seems to be another girl there. Well, thischange is, of course, probably of no importance to anyone,and quite certainly of none to Klamm. But the biggera job is, and Klamm's job is, of course, the biggest, theless strength is left over for protecting oneself against theexternal world, and as a result any unimportant alterationin the most unimportant things can be a serious dis-turbance. The smallest alteration on the writing-desk,the removal of a dirty spot that has been rlicre eversince anyone can remember, all this can be disturbing,and so, in the same way, can a new bar-maid. Well,of course, all of this, even if it would distiub anyoneelse and in any given job, does not disturb Klamm ;that is quite out of the question. Nevertheless weare obliged to keep such a watch over Klamm's comft)rtthat we remove even disturbances that are not suclifor him — and probably there are none whatsoever forhim — if they strike us as being possible disturbances. 
It is not for his sake, it is not for the sake of his work,tKat we remove these disturbances, but for our sake, forthe sake of our conscience and our peace of mind. Forthis reason this Frieda must at once return to the tap-room. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely throughthe fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away


THE CASTLE

33 ^
again, but, for the time being, she must return. Youare living with her, as I am told, therefore arrangeimmediately for her return. In this no considerationcan be given to personal feelings, that goes without saying,of course, hence I shall not enter into the least furtherdiscussion of the matter. I am already doing muchmore than is necessary if I mention that if you showyourself reliable in this^ trivial affair it may on someoccasion be of use to you in improving your prospects. 
That is all I have to say to you.*' He gave^K. a nod ofdismissal, put on the fur cap handed to him by theservant, and, followed by the servant, went down thepassage, rapidly, but limping a little. 

Sometimes orders that were given here were very easyto carry out, but this case did not please K. Not onlybecause the order affected Frieda and, though intendedas an order, sounded to K. like scornful laughter, butabove all because what it confronted K. was with thefutility of all his endeavours. The orders, the unfavour-able and the favourable, disregarded him, and even themost favourable probably had an ultimate unfavourablecore, but in any case they all disregarded him, and he wasin much too lowly a position to be able to intervene or,far less, to silence them and to gain a hearing for his ownvoice. If Erlanger waves you off, what are you goingto do ? And if he were not to wave you off, what couldyou say to him ? True, K. remained aware that hisweariness had to-day done him more harm than all theunfavourableness of circumstances, but why could ,Jhe,who had believed he could rely on his body and whowould never have started out on his way without thatconviction, why could he not endure a few bad nights andone sleepless night, why did he become so unmanageablytired precisely here where nobody was tired or, rather. 



THE CASTLE

J33
where everyone was tired all the time, without this,however, doing any damage to the work, indeed, evenseeming to promote it ? The conclusion to be drawnfrom this was that this was in its way a quite differentsort of fatigue from K/s. Here it was doubtless fatigueamid happy work, something that outwardly looked likefatigue and was actually indestructible repose, indestruct-ible peace. If one is a little tired at noon, that is partof the haopy natural course of the day. ** For thegentlemen here it is always noon,"' K. said to himself. 

And it was very much in keeping with this that now,at five o'clock, things were beginning to stir everywhereon each side of the passage. This babel of voices inthe rooms had something extremely merry about it. Onceit sounded like the jubilation of children getting readyfor a picnic, another time like daybreak in a hen-roost,like the joy of being in complete accord with theawakening day. Somewhere indeed a gentleman imitatedthe crowing of a cock. Though the passage itself wasstill empty, the doors were already in motion, time andagain one would be opened a little and quickly shutagain, the passage buzzed with this opening and shuttingof doors, now and then, too, in the space above thepartition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling,K. saw towsled early-morning heads appear and instantlyvanish again. From far off there slowly came a littlebarrow pushed by a servant, containing files. A secondservant walked beside it, with a catalogue in his hand,qj^viously comparing the numbers on the doors with thoseon the files. The little barrow stopped outside most ofthe doors, usually then, too, the door would open andthe appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a smallsheet of paper— in such cases a little conversation cameabout between the room and the passage, probab y t ®


THE CASTLE

334
servant was being reproached — ^would be handed into theroom. If the door remained shut, the files were carefullypiled up on the threshold. In such cases it seemed to K. 
as though the movement of the doors round about didnot diminish, even though there the files had alreadybeen distributed, but as though it were on the contraryincreasing. Perhaps the others were yearningly peeringout at the files incomprehensibly left lying on thethreshold, they could not understand how anyone shouldonly need to open the door in order to gain possession ofhis files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was evenpossible that files that were never picked up at all mightlater be distributed among the other gentlemen, whoW’cre even now seeking to make sure, by frequentpeering out, whether the files were still lying on thethreshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 
Incidentally, these files that remained lying were for themost parr particularly big bundles ; and K. assumed thatthey had been temporarily left lying out of a certaindesire to boast or out of malice or even out of a justifiablepride that would be stimulating to colleagues. Whatstrengthened him in this assumption was the fact thatsometimes, always when he happened not to be looking,the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough,was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and thedoor then remained as motionless as before, the doorsround about then also became quiet again, disappointedor, it might be, content that this object of constantprovocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^they gradually came into motion again. 

K. considered all this not only with curiosity but alsow ith sympathy. He almost enjoyed the feeling of beingin the midst of this bustle, looked this way and that,following — even though at an appropriate distance — the


THE CASTLE

335
servants, who, admittedly, had already more than onceturned towards him with a severe glance, with loweredhead and pursed lips, while he watched their work ofdistribution. The further it progressed the less smoothlyit went, either the catalogue was not quire correct, or thefiles were not always clearly identifiable for the servants,or the gentlemen were raising objections for otherreasons ; at any rate it woul4 happen that some of thedistributions had to be withdrawn, then the little barrowmoved bacTc, and through the chink of the door negotia-tions were conducted about the return of files. Thesenegotiations in themselves caused great difficulties, but ithappened frequently enough that if it was a matrci ofreturn precisely those doors that had earlier on been inthe most lively motion now remained inexorably shut,as though they did not w'ish to know anything moreabout the matter at all. Only then did the actualdifficulties begin. He who believed he had a claim to thefiles became extremely impatient, made a great dm insidehis room, clapping his hands, stamping his feet, everand again shouting a particular file-number out into thepassage through the chink of the door. Then the littlebarrow was often left quite unattended. The oneservant was busy trying to appease the impatient official,the other was outside the shut door battling for thereturn. Both had a hard time of it. TTie impatientofficial was often made still more impatient by theattempts to appease him, he could no longer endurelistening to the servant's empty words, he did not wantconsolation, he wanted files ; such a gentleman oncepoured the contents of a whole wash-basin through thegap at the top, on to the servant. But the other servant,obviously the higher in rank, was having a much hardertime of it. If the gentleman concerned at all deigned to


THE CASTLE

336
enter into negotiations, there were matter-of-fact dis-cussions during which the servant referred to his catalogue,the gentleman to his notes and to precisely those files thathe was supposed to return, which for the time being,however, he clutched tightly in his hand, so that scarcelya corner of them remained visible to the servant s longingeyes. Then, too, the servant would have to run backfor fresh evidence to th^ little barrow, which had byitself rolled a little further along the slightly slopingpassage, or he would have to go to the gentleman claimingthe files and there report the objections raised by thegentleman now in possession, receiving in return freshcounter-objections. Such negotiations lasted a very longtime, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentlemanwould perhaps hand over part of the files or get otherfiles as compensation, since all that had happened wasthat a mistake had been made ; but it also happenedsometimes that someone simply had to abandon all thefiles demanded, either because he had been driven into acorner by the servant's evidence or because he was tiredof the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not giverlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flungthem out into the passage, so that the strings came undoneand the papers flew about and the servants had a greatdeal of trouble getting everything straight again. Butall this was still relatively simple compared with wliathappened when the servant got no answer at all to hispleading for the return of the files. Then he wouldstand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, nosound came from inside the room, and to go in withoutpermission was obviously something the servant had noright to do. Then even this excellent servant wouldsometimes lose his self-control, he would go to his


THE CASTLE

?37
barrow, sit down on the files, wipe the sweat from hisbrow and for a little while do nothing at all but sitthere helplessly swinging his feet. All round there wasvery great interest in the affair, everywhere there waswhispering going on, scarcely any door was quiet, andup above at the top of the partition wail faces quccriymasked almost to the eyes with scarves and kerchiefs,though for the rest never for ai) instant remaining quietin one place, watched all that was going on. In themidst of thfs unrest K. had been struck by the fact thatBiirgers door had remained shut the whole time andthat the servant had already passed along this part of thepassage, but no files had been allotted to Burgcl. Perhapshe was still asleep, which would indeed, in all this dm,have indicated that he w^as a very sound sleeper, but whyhad he not received any files ? Only very few rooms,and these probably unoccupied ones, had been passedover in this manner. On the other hand there w'asalready a new and particularly restless occupant ofHrlanger's room, Erlanger must positively have beendriven out in the night by him, this was not much inkeeping with Erlanger's cool, distant nature, but thefact that he had had to wait on the threshold for K. didafter all indicate that it was so. 

Ever and again K. would then soon return from alldistracting observations to watching the servant ; truly,what K. had otherwise been told about servants ingeneral, about their slackness, their easy life, theirarrogance, did not apply to this servant, there weredoubtless exceptions among the servants too or, what wasmore probable, various groups among them, for here, asK. noticed, there were many nuances of which he hadup to now scarcely had as much as a glimpse. What heparticularly liked was this servant’s inexorability. In his


THE CASTLE

338
Struggle with these stubborn little rooms — to K. it oftenseemed to be a struggle with the rooms, since he scarcelyever caught sight of the occupants — the servant nevergave up. His strength did sometimes fail — whose'strength would not nave failed? — but he soon recovered,slipped down from the little barrow and, holding himselfstraight, clenching his teeth, returned to the attackagainst the door that had to be conquered. And it wouldhappen that he would be beaten back twice or threetimes, and that in a very simple way, solely* by means ofthat confounded silence, and nevertheless was still notdefeated. Seeing that he could not achieve anything byfrontal assault, he would try another method, for instance,if K. understood rightly, cunning. He would thenseemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it toexhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to otherdoors, after a while returned, called the other servant,all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling upfiles on the threshold of the shut door, as though he hadchanged his mind, and as though there were no justificationfor raking anything away from this gentleman, but, onthe contrary, something to be allotted to him. Thenhe would walk on, still, however, keeping an eye on thedoor, and then when the gentleman, as usually liappened,soon cautiously opened the door in order to pull the filesinside, in a few leaps the servant was there, thrust hisfoot between the door and the doorpost, so forcing thegentleman at least to negotiate with him face to face,which then usually led after all to a more or less s;y:is-factory result. And if this method was not successfulor if at one door this seemed to him not the rightapproach, he would try another method. He wouldthen transfer his attention to the gentleman who wasclaiming the files. Then he pushed aside the other


THE CASTLE

339
servant, who worked always only in a mechanical way, afairly useless assistant to him, and himself began talkingpersuasively to the gentleman, whisperingly, furtively,pushing his head right round the door, probably makingpromises to him and assuring him that at the nextdistribution the other gentleman would be appropriatelypunished, at any rate he would often point towards theopponent's door and laugh, iti as far as his fatigueallowed. Then, however, there w'cre cases, one or two,when he did abandon all attemptwS, but even here K. 
believed that it was only an apparent abandonment or atleast an abandonment for justifiable reasons, for hequietly walked on, tolerating, without glancing round,the din made by the w’ronged gentleman, only anoccasional, more prolonged closing of the eyes indicatingthat the din was painful to him. Yet then the gentlemanw'ould gradually quiet down, and just as a child’s ceaselessaying gradually passes into ever less frequent singlesobs, so it was also with his outcry ; but even after ithad become quite quiet there, there would, nevertheless,sometimes be a single cry or a rapid opening and slam-ming of that door. In any case it became apparent thatlierc, too, the servant had probably acred in exactly theright way. Finally there remained only one gentlemanwho would not quiet down, he would be silent for along period, but only in order to gather strength, then hewould burst out again, no less furiously than before. Itwas not quite clear why he shouted and complained intljffi way, perhaps it was not about the distribution offiles at all. Meanwhile the servant had finished hiswork ; only one single file, actually only a little piece ofpaper, a leaf from a note-pad, was left in the littlebarrow, tlirough his helper's fault, and now they did notknow whom to allot it to. ' That might very well be


THE CASTLE

340
niy file,' it flashed through K.'s mind. The Mayor had,after all, constantly spoken of this smallest of sm jl cases. 
And, arbitrary and ridiculous though he himself atbottom regarded his assumption as being, K. tried to getcloser to the servant, who was thoughtfully glancingover the little piece of paper ; this was not altogethereasy, for the servant ill repaid K.'s sympathy, even in themidst of his most strefvaous work he had always stillfound time to look round at K., angrily or impatiently,with nervous jerks of his head. Only now, afterfinishing the distribution, did he seem to have somewhatforgotten K., as indeed he had altogether become moreindifferent, this being understandable as a result of hisgreat exhaustion, nor did he give himself much troublewith the little piece of paper, perhaps not even readingit through, only pretending to do so, and although herein the passage he would probably have delighted anyoccupant of a room by allotting this piece of paper tohim, he decided otherwise, he was now sick and tired ofdistributing things, with his forefinger on his lips he gavehis companion a sign to be silent, tore — K, was still farfrom having reached his side — the piece of paper intoshreds and put the pieces into his pocket. It wasprobably the first irregularity that K. had seen in theworking of the administration here, admittedly it waspossible that he had misunderstood this too. And evenif it was an irregularity, it was pardonable ; under theconditions prevailing here the servant could not workunerringly, some time the accumulated annoyance, 'theaccumulated uneasiness, must break out, and if itmanifested itself only in the tearing up of a little pieceof paper it was still comparatively innocent. For theyells of the gentleman who could not be quieted by anymethod were still resounding through the passage, and


THE CASTLE

341
his colleagues, who in other respects did not adopt a veryfriendly attitude to each other, seemed to be wholly ofone mind with respect to this uproar ; it gradually beganto seem as if the gentleman had taken on the task ofmaking a noise for all those who *simply by calling outto him and nodding their heads encouraged him to keepit up. But now the servant was no longer paying anyfurther attention to the matter^ he had finished his job,he pointed to the handle of the little barrow, indicatingthat the otRer servant should take hold of it, and so theywent away again as they had come, only more contentedlyand so quickly that the little barrow bounced along aheadof them. Only once did they start and glance backagain, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screamingand shouting, and outside whose door K. was nowhanging about because he would have liked to discoverwhat it really was that the gentleman wanted, evidentlyfound shouting no longer adequate, probably haddiscovered the button of an electric bell and, doubtlessenraptured at being relieved in this way, instead ofshouting now began an uninterrupted ringing of the bell. 
Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms,which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemedto be doing something that all would have liked to dolong ago and only for some unknown reason had had toleave undone. Was it perhaps attendance, perhapsFrieda, for whom the gentleman was ringing ? If thatwas so, he could go on ringing for a long time. ForFrieda was busy wrapping Jeremiah up in wet sheets,and even supposing he were well again by now, she hadno time, for then she was in his arms. But the ringingof the bell did instantly have an effect. Even now thelandlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening alongfrom far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ;


THE CASTLE

342
but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, hewas in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, justas if he liad been called on account of some great disasterand were coming in order to take hold of it and instantlysmother it against his chest, and at every little irregularityin the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air andhurry on faster still. Now his wife also appeared, aconsiderable distance bejjind him, she too running withoutspread arms, but her steps were short and affected,and K. thought to himself that she would cdhie too late,the landlord would in the meantime have done all thatwas necessary. And in order to make room for thelandlord as he ran K. stood close back against the wall. 
But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., asthough K. were his goal, and the next instant the land-lady was there too, and both overwhelmed him withreproaches, which in the suddenness and surprise of it hedid not understand, especially since the ringing of thegentleman's bell was also mixed up with it and otherbells also began ringing, now no longer indicating a stateof emergency, but only for fun and in excess of delight. 
Because he was very much concerned to understandexactly what his fault was, K. was entirely in agreementwith the landlord’s taking him by the arm and walkingaway with him out of this uproar, which was continuallyincreasing, for behind them — K. did not turn round atall, because the landlord, and even more, on the otherside, the landlady, was talking to him urgently — thedoors were now opening wide, the passage was becominganimated, traffic seemed to be beginning there as in alively narrow little alley, the doors ahead of them wereevidently waiting impatiently for K. to go past them atlong last so that they could release the gentlemen, andin the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the


THE CASTLE

34 ?
bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. 
Now at last — they were by now again in the quiet whitecourtyard, where some sledges were waiting — K. graduallylearnt what it was all about. Neither the landlord northe landlady could understand how K. could havfc daredto do such a thing. But what had he done ? K. askedtime and again, but for a long time could not get anyanswer because his guilt was ^1 too much a matter ofcourse to the two of them and hence it simply did notoccur to thtm that he asked in good faith. Only veryslowly did K. realise how everything stood. He hadhad no right to be in the passage ; in general it was atbest the tap-room, and this only by way of privilege andsubject to revocation, to which he had entry. If he wassummoned by one of the gentlemen, he had, of course,to appear in the place to which he was summoned, buthad to remain always aware — surely he at least had someordinary common sense ? — that he was in a place wherehe actually did not belong, a place whither he had onlybeen summoned by one of the gentlemen, and that withextreme reluctance and only because it was necessitatedby ofEcial business. It was up to him, therefore, toappear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then,however, to disappear again, if possible even morequickly. Had he then not had any feeling at all of thegrave impropriety of being there in the passage ? But ifhe had had it, how had he brought himself to roam aboutthere like cattle at pasture ? Had he not been summonedto jttend a night interrogation and did he not know whythe night interrogations had been introduced ? Thenight interrogations — and here K. was given a newexplanation of their meaning — had after all only thepurpose of examining applicants the sight of whom bytlay would be unendurable to the gentlemen, and this


THE CASTLE

344
quickly, at night, by artificial light, with the possibilityof, immediately after the interrogation, forgetting all theugliness of it in sleep. K/s behaviour, however, hadbeen a mockery of precautionary measures. Even ghostsvanish towards morning, but K. had remained there, hishands in his pockets, as though he were expecting that,since he did not take himself off, the whole passage withall the rooms and gentle;jien would take itself off. Andthis — he could be sure of it — would quite certainly havehappened if it had been in any way possible, for thedelicacy of die gentlemen was limitless. None of themwould drive K. away, or even say, what went after allwithout saying, that he should at long last go away;none of them would do that, although during the periodof K/s presence they were probably trembling withagitation and the morning, their favourite time, wasbeing ruined for them. Instead of taking any stepsagainst K., they preferred to suffer, in which, indeed, acertain part was probably played by the hope that K. 
would not be able to help gradually, at long last, comingto realise what was so glaringly obvious and, in accordwith the gentlemen's anguish, would himself begin tosuffer, to the point of unendurability, from his ownstanding there in the passage in the morning, visible toall, in that horribly unfitting manner. A vain hope. 
They did not know or in their kindness and condescensiondid not want to admit there also existed hearts that wereinsensitive, hard, and not to be softened by any feeling ofreverence. Does not even the nocturnal moth, the pporcreature, when day comes seek out a quiet cranny, flattenitself out there, oiJy wishing it could vanish and beingunhappy because it cannot ? K. on the other handplanted himself precisely where he was most visible,and if by doing so he had been able to prevent day


THE CASTLE

345
from breaking, he would have done so. He could notprevent it, but, alas, he could delay it and make it moredifficult. Had he not watched the distribution of thefiles? Something that nobody was allowed to watchexcept the people most closely involved. Somethingthat neither the landlord nor his wife had been allowedto see in their own house. Something of which theyhad only heard tell and in allusi(^s, as for instance to-dayfrom the servants. Had he then not noticed under whatdifficulties fhc distribution of files had proceeded, some-thing in itself incomprehensible, since after all each ofthe gentlemen served only the cause, never thinking ofhis personal advantage and hence being obliged to exertall his powers to seeing that the distribution of the files,this important, fundamental, preliminary work, shouldproceed quickly and easily and without any mistakes ?And had K. then not been even remotely struck by thenotion that the main cause of all the difficulties was thefact that the distribution had had to be carried out withthe doors almost quite shut, without any chance ofdirect dealings between the gentlemen, who among eachother naturally could come to an understanding in atwinkling, while the mediation through the servantsinevitably dragged on almost for hours, never couldfunction smoothly, was a lasting torment to the gentlemenand the servants and would probably have damagingconsequences in the later work? And why could thegentlemen not deal with each other ? Well, did K. stillno% understand ? The like of it had never occurred inth*e experience of the landlady — and the landlord for hispart confirmed this — and they had, after all, had to dealwith many sorts of difficult people. Things that ingeneral one would not dare to mention in so many wordsone had to tell him frankly, for otherwise he would not


THE CASTLE

346
understand the most essential things. Well, then, sinceit had to be said : it was on his account, solely andexclusively on his account, that the gentlemen had notbeen able to come forth out of their rooms, since in themorning, so soon after having been asleep, they were toobashful, too vulnerable, to be able to expose themselvesto the gaze of strangers ; they literally felt, howevercompletely dressed thej^ might be, too naked to showthemselves. It was admittedly difficult to say why theyfelt this shame, perhaps these everlasting Workers feltshame merely because they had been asleep. But whatperhaps made them feel even acuter shame than showingthemselves was seeing strangers ; what they had success-fully disposed of by means of the night interrogations,namely the sight of the applicants they found so hard toendure, they did not want now in the morning to havesuddenly, without warning, in all its truth to nature,obtruding itself upon them all over again. That wassomething they simply could not face. What sort ofperson must it be who failed to respect that ! Well, yes,it must be a person like K. Someone who rode rough-shod over everything, both over the law and over themost ordinary human consideration, with this callousindiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did notcare that he was making the distribution of the files almostimpossible and damaging the reputation of the house andwho brought about something that had never happenedbefore, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, hadbegun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ingof their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people,had reached for the bell and called for help to expel thisperson on whom nothing else could make any impression !They, the gentlemen, calling for help ! Would not thelandlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come


THE CASTLE

347
dashing along ages before that if they had only dared toappear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in themorning, even if it was only in order to bring help andflien disappear again at once ? Quivering with indigna-tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness,they had waited there at the end of the passage, and theringing of the bell, which they had never really expectedto hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. Well,now the worst was over ! If you could cast a glanceinto the merry bustle among the gentlemen now at longlast liberated from K. ! For K., of course, it was notyet over and done with ; he would certainly have toanswer for the trouble he had caused here. 

Meanwhile they had entered the tap-room ; why thelandlord, despite all his anger, had nevertlielcss broughtK. along here, was not quite clear, perhaps he had afterall realised that K/s state of fatigue for the present madeIt impossible for him to leave the house. Withoutwaiting to be asked to sit down, K. the next momentsimply collapsed on one of the barrels. There in thedark he felt all right. In the large room there was onlyone dim electric bulb burning over the beer-taps. 
Outside, too, there was still deep darkness, there seemedto be snow blowing on the wind. Being here in thewarmth was something to be thankful for and one hadto take precautions against being driven out. Thelandlord and his wife were still standing before him asthough even now he still constituted a certain menace,as^ chough in view of his utter unreliability it were notquite impossible that he might here suddenly start upand try to invade the passage once again. Besides, theythemselves were tired after the shock they had had in thenight and getting up earlier than usual, especially thelandlady, who was wearing a silkily rustling, wide-skirted,


THE CASTLE

348
brown dress, buttoned and tied up in a somewhatslovenly way — where had she pulled it out from in herhaste ? — and stood with her head resting, like a droopingflower, on her husband's shoulder, dabbing at her eyeswith a fine cambric handkerchief, now and then castingchildishly malevolent glances at K. In order to reassurethe couple, K. said that everything they had told himnow was entirely new him, but that in spite of hisignorance of these facts he would not have remained solong in the passage, where he really had had* no businessto be and where he had certainly not wanted to upsetanyone, but that all this had only happened because hehad been excessively tired. He thanked them for havingput an end to the distressing scene, if he should be takento task about the matter it would be very welcome to him,for only in this way could he prevent a general mis-interpretation of his behaviour. Fatigue, and nothingelse, was to blame for it. This fatigue, however,originated in the fact that he was not yet used to thestrenuous nature of the interrogations. After all, he hadnot yet been here long. As soon as he was more ex-perienced in these matters, it would become impossiblefor anything of this sort to happen again. Perhaps hewas taking the interrogations too seriously, but that initself was, after all, probably no disadvantage. He hadhad to go through two interrogations, one followingquickly on the other, one with Biirgel and the secondwith Erlanger, and the first in particular had greatlyexhausted him, though the second one had not lastedlong, Erlanger having only asked him for a favour, butboth together had been more than he could stand at onego, and perhaps a thing like that would to too muchfor other people too, for instance for the landlord. Bythe time he was done with the second interrogation he


THE CASTLE

349
had really been walking in a sort of swoon. It had beenalmost like being drunk ; after all, he had seen andheard the two gentlemen for the first time and had alsohad to answer their questions, into^the bargain. Every-thing, so far as he knew, had worked out pretty well,but then that misfortune had occurred, which, after whathad gone before, he could scarcely be blamed for. 
Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realisedwhat a condition he was in and they would certainly havelooked after him and so prevented all the rest, butErlanger had had to go away immediately after theinterrogation, evidently in order to drive up to theCastle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after thatinterrogation— and how then should K. have been ableto come out of it with his strength unimpaired ?— hadgone to sleep and had indeed slept through the wholedistribution of files. If K. had had a similar chance hewould have been delighted to take it and would gladlyhave done without all the prohibited insight into whatwas going on there, and this all the more lightheartedlysince in reality he had been quite incapable of seeinganything, for which reason even the most sensitivegentlemen could have shown themselves before himwithout embarrassment. 

The mention of the two interrogations— particularly ofthat with Erlanger— and the respect with which K. spokeof the gentlemen inclined the landlord favourablytowards him. He seemed to be prepared to grant K.’sreqi^est to be allowed to lay a board across the barrelsand sleep there at least till dawm, but the landlady wasmarkedly against it, twitching ineffectively here andthere at her dress, the slovenly state of which she seemedonly now to have noticed, she kept on shaking her head ;a quarrel obviously of long standing with regard to the


THE CASTLE

350
orderliness of the house was on the point of breaking outafresh. For K. in his fatigued state the talk betweenthe couple took on exaggeratedly great significance. Tobe driven out from. here again seemed to him to be amisfortune surpassing all that had happened to himhitherto. This must not be allowed to happen, even ifthe landlord and the landlady should unite against him. 
Crumpled up on the ba*rel, he looked in eager expectanceat the two of them until the landlady, with her abnormaltouchiness, which had long ago struck suddenlystepped aside and — probably she had by now beendiscussing other things with the landlord — exclaimed :“ How he stares at me ! Do send him away now !But K., seizing the opportunity and now utterly, almostto the point of indifference, convinced that he wouldstay, said : “ Tm not looking at you, only at your dress.'*** Why my dress ? '' the landlady asked agitatedly. 
K. shrugged his shoulders. ** Come on J '' the landladysaid to the landlord. ** Don't you see he's drunk, thelout? Leave him here to sleep it off! " and she evenordered Pepi, who on being called by her emerged out ofthe dark, towsled, tired, idly holding a broom in herhand, to throw K. some sort of a cushion. 


XX
W HEN K. woke up he at first thought he had hardlyslept at all ; the room was as empty and warmas before, all the walls in darkness, the one bulb overthe beer-taps extinguished, and outside the windows wasthe night. But when he stretched, and the cushion felldown and the bed and the barrels creaked, Pepi instantly


THE CASTLE

351
appeared, and now he learnt that it was already eveningand that he had slept for well over twelve hours. Thelandlady had asked after him several times during theday, and so had Gerstacker, who had been waiting herein the dark, by the beer, while K. had been talking to thelandlady in the morning, but then he had not dared todisturb K., had been here once in the meantime to seehow K. was getting on, and finally, so at least it wasalleged, Frieda had also come and had stood for a momentbeside K., yet she had scarcely come on K/s account, butbecause she had had various things to make ready here,for in the evening she was to resume her old dutiesafter all. ** I suppose she doesn’t like you any more ?Pepi asked, bringing coffee and cakes. But she nolonger asked it maliciously, in her old way, but sadly,as though in the meantime she had come to know themalice of the world, compared with which all one’s ownmalice fails and becomes senseless ; she spoke to K. asto a fellow sufferer, and when he tasted the coffee andshe thought she saw that it was not sweet enough forhim, she ran and brought him the full sugar-bowl. 
Her sadness had, indeed, not prevented her from trickingherself out to-day if anything even more than the lasttime ; she wore an abundance of bows and ribbonsplaited into her hair, along her forehead and on hertemples the hair had been carefully curled with the tongs,and round her neck she had a little chain that hung downinto the low-cut opening of her blouse. When, in hisconfentment at having at last slept his fill and now beingpermitted to drink a good cup of coffee, K. furtivelystretched his hand out towards one of the bows and triedto untie it, Pepi said wearily : Do leave me alone,”
and sat down beside him on a barrel. And K. did noteven need to ask her what was the matter, she at once


THE CASTLE

352
began telling the story herself, rigidly staring into K/scoffee-mug, as though she needed some distraction, evenwhile she was talking, as though she could not quiteabandon herself to ^ her suffering even when she wasdiscussing it, as that would be beyond her powers. 
First of dl K, learnt that actually he was to blame forPepi's misfortunes, but that she did not bear him anygrudge. And she nodded eagerly as she talked, in orderto prevent K. from raising any objection. First he hadtaken Frieda away from the tap-room and thus madePepi’s rise possible. There was nothing else that couldbe imagined that could have brought Frieda to give upher situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like aspider in its web, with all the threads under her control,threads of which no one knew but she ; it would havebeen quite impossible to winkle her out against her will,only love for some lowly person, that is to say, somethingthat was not in keeping with her position, could driveher from her place. And Pepi ? Had she ever thought ofgetting the situation for herself ? She was a chambermaid,she had an insignificant situation with few prospects, shehad dreams of a great future like any other girl, one can'tstop oneself from having dreams, but she had neverseriously thought of getting on in the world, she hadresigned herself to staying in the job she had. And nowFrieda suddenly vanished from the tap-room, it hadhaf>pened so suddenly that the landlord had not had asuitable substitute on hand at the moment, he hadlooked round and his glance had fallen on Pepi, who^h^d,admittedly, pushed herself forward in such a way as tobe noticed. At that time she had loved K. as she hadnever loved anyone before ; month after month she hadbeen down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spendyears there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend


THE CASTLE

353
her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and nowsuddenly K. had appeared, a hero, a rescuer of maidensin distress, and had opened up the way upstairs for her. 
Admittedly he did not know anything about her, hehad not done it for her sake, but rfiat did not diminishher gratitude, in the night preceding her appointment —the appointment was not yet definite, but still, it wasnow veiy probable — she spent Jiours talking to him,whispering her thanks in his ear. And in her eyes itexalted what he had done still more that it should havebeen Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdenedhimself ; there was something incomprehensibly selflessin his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave theway for Pepi — Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl withshort, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, alwayshaving some sort of secrets, which was probably con-nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched-ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, shemust at least have other secrets that nobody couldenquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. 
And even thoughts like the following had occurred toPepi at that time : is it possible that K. really lovesFrieda, isn't he deceiving himself or is he perhapsdeceiving only Frieda, and will perhaps the sole outcomeof the whole thing after all be nothing but Pepi’s risein the world, and will K. then notice the mistake, or notwant to cover it up any more, and no longer see Frieda,but only Pepi, which need not even be a crazy piece ofconceit on Pepi's part, for so far as Frieda was concernedsheVas a match for her, one girl against another, whichnobody would deny, and it had, after all, been primarilyFrieda's position and the glory that Frieda had been ableto invest it with that had dazzled K. at the moment. 
And so then Pepi had dreamed that when she had the12


THE CASTLE

354
position K. would come to her, pleading, and she wouldthen have the choice of either granting K/s plea andlosing her situation or of rejecting him and rising further. 
And she had worked out for herself that she wouldrenounce everything Und lower herself to him and teachhim what true love was, which he would never be ableto learn from Frieda and which was independent of allpositions of honour in ^he world. But then everythingturned out differently. And what was to blame forthis? Above all, K., and then, of cou»3e, Frieda'sartfulness. Above all, K. For what was he after, whatsort of strange person was he ? What was he trying toget, what were these important things that kept him busyand made him forget what was nearest of all, best of all,most beautiful of all ? Pepi was the sacrifice and every-thing was stupid and everyThing was lost ; and anyonewho had the strength to set fire to the whole Herrenhofand burn it down, burn it to the ground, so that not atrace of it was left, burn it up like a piece of paper inthe stove, he would to-day be Pepi's chosen love. Well,so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day,shortly before lunch-time. The work here was farfrom easy, it was almost killingly hard work, but therewas a good deal to be got out of it too. Even previouslyPepi had not lived only for the day, and even if shewould never have aspired to this situation even in herwildest dreams, still, she had made plenty of observa-tions, she knew what this situation involved, she hadnot taken on the situation without being prepared. 
One could not take it on without being prepaiod,otherwise one lost it in the first few hours. Particularlyif one were to behave here the way the chamber-maidsdid ! As a chamber-maid one did in time come to feelone was quite lost and forgotten ; it was like working


THE CASTLE

355
down a mine, at least that was the way it was in thesecretaries’ passage, for days on end there ; except for afew daytime applicants who flitted in and out withoutdaring to look up one didn’t see a soul but two or threeother chamber-maids, and they were just as embittered. 
In the morning one wasn't allowed to leave the room atall, that was when the secretaries wished to be aloneamong themselves, their meals^ were brought to themfrom the kitchen by the men-servants, the chamber-maids ususdly had nothing to do with that, and duringmeal-times, too, one was not allowed to show oneselfin the passage. It was only while the gentlemen wereworking that the chamber-maids were allowed to do therooms, but naturally not those that were occupied, onlythose that happened to be empty at the time, and thework had to be done quite quietly so that the gendemenwere not disturbed at their work. But how was itpossible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemenoccupied their rooms for several days on end, and themen-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered aboutthere into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid wasfinally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a statethat not even the Flood could wash it clean? Truly,they were exalted gentlemen, but one had to make agreat eflFort to overcome one's disgust so as to be ableto clean up after them. It wasn’t that the chamber-maids had such a great amount of work, but it waspretty tough. And never a kind word, never anythingbut reproaches, in particularly the following, which wasthe most tormenting and the most frequent : tliat fileshad got lost during the doing of the rooms. In realitynothing ever got lost, every scrap of paper was handedover to the landlord, but in fact of course files did getlost, only it happened not to be the fault of the maids. 



THE CASTLE

356
And then commissions came, and the maids had to leavetheir room, and the members of commission rummagedthrough the beds, the girls had no possessions, of course,their few things could be put in a basket, but still, thecommission searched for hours all the same. Naturallythey found nothing. How should files come to bethere ? What did the maids care about files ? But theoutcome was always the same^ abuse and threats utteredby the disappointed commission and passed on by thelandlord. And never any peace, neither by day nor bynight, noise going on half through the night and noiseagain at the crack of dawn. If at least one didn't haveto live in, but one had to, for it was the chamber-nuids'job to bring snacks from the kitchen as they might beordered, in between rimes, particularly at night. Alwayssuddenly the fist thumping on the chamber-maids' door,the order being dictated, the running down to thekitchen, shaking the sleeping scullery-lads, the settingdown of the tray with the things ordered outside thechamber-maids' door, from where the men-servantsfetched it — how sad all that was. But that was not theworst. The worst was when no order came, that was tosay, when, at dead of night, when everyone ought to beasleep and most of them really were asleep at last,sometimes a tiptoeing around began outside the chamber-maids' door. Then the girls got out of bed — the bunkswere on top of each other, for there was very little spacethere, the whole room the maids had being actuallynothing more than a large cupboard with three shelves init — listened at the door, knelt down, put their aitusround each other in fear. And whoever was tiptoeingoutside the door could be heard all the time. Theywould all be thankful if only he would come right inand be done with it, but nothing happened, nobody


THE CASTLE

357
came in. And at the same time one had to admit tooneself that it need not necessarily be some dangerthreatening, perhaps it was only someone walking up anddown outside the door, trying to, make up his mind toorder something, and then not being able to bring himselfto it after all. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhapsit was something quite different. For really one didn'tknow the gentlemen at all, ont had hardly set eyes onthem. Aiyway, inside the room the maids were faintingin terror, and when at last it was quiet again outside theyleant against the wall and had not enough strength leftto get back into bed. This was the life that was waitingfor Pepi to return to it, this very evening she w^as tomove back to her place in the maids’ room. And why ?Because of K. and Frieda. Back again into that life shehad scarcely escaped from, which she escaped from, it istrue, with K.'s help, but also, of course, through verygreat exertions of her own. For in that service there thegirls neglected themselves, even those who were other-wise the most careful and tidy. For whom should theysmarten themselves ? Nobody saw them, at best thestaff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enoughwas welcome to smarten herself. But for the rest theywere always in their little room or in the gentlemen’srooms, which it was madness and a waste so much as toset foot in with clean clothes on. And always byartificial light and in that stuffy air — with the heatingalways on — and actually always tired. The one freeafternoon in the week was best spent sleeping quietlyand without fear in one of the cubby-holes in the kitchen. 
So what should one smarten oneself up for ? Yes, onescarcely bothered to dress at all. And now Pepi hadsuddenly been transferred to the tap-room, where, if onewanted to maintain one’s position there, exactly the


THE CASTLE

358
opposite was necessary, where one was always in full viewof people, and among them very observant gentlemen,used to the best of everything, and where one thereforealways had to look a^s smart and pleasant as possible. 
Well, that was a change. And Pepi could say of herselfthat she had not failed to rise to the occasion. Pepi wasnot worrying about how things would turn out later. 
She knew she had the abilities necessary in this situation,she was quite certain of it, she had this conviction evennow and nobody could take it away from her, not evento-day, on the day of her defeat. The only difficulty washow she was to stand the test in the very beginning,because she was, after all, only a poor chamber-maid, withnothing to wear and no jewellery, and because the gentle-men had not the patience to wait and see how one woulddevelop, but instantly, without transition, wanted abar-maid of the proper kind, or else they turned away. 
One would think they didn't expect so very much since,after all, Frieda could satisfy them. But that was notright, Pepi had often thought about this, she had, afterall, often been together with Frieda and had for a timeeven slept together with her. It wasn't easy to findFrieda out, and anyone who was not very much on thelook-out — and which of the gentlemen was very muchon the look-out, after all ? — was at once misled by her. 
No one knew better than Frieda herself how miserableher looks were, for instance when one saw her for thefirst time with her hair down, one clasped one's hands inpity, by rights a girl like that shouldn't even b^ achamber-maid ; and she knew it, too, and many a nigfitshe had spent crying about it, pressing tight againstPepi and laying Pepi’s hair round her own head. Butwhen she was on duty all her doubts vanished, shethought herself better-looking than anyone, and she had


THE CASTLE

35Q
rhc knack of getting everyone to think the same. Sheknew what people were like, and really that was whereher art lay. And she was quick with a lie, and cheated,so that people didn't have time to get a closer look at her. 
Naturally that wouldn't do in the*long run, people hadeyes in their heads and sooner or later their eyes wouldtell them what to think. But the moment she noticedthe danger of that she was ready with another method,recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Heraffair with fClamm ! If you don't believe it, you can goand get proof ; go to Klamm and ask him. Howcunning, how cunning. And if you don't happen todare to go to Klamm with an enquiry like that, andperhaps wouldn't be admitted to him with infinitelymore important enquiries, and Klamm is, in fact,completely inaccessible to you — only to you and yoursort, for Frieda, for instance, pops in to see him whenevershe likes — if that's how it is, you can still get proof ofthe thing, you only need to wait. After all, Klamm won'tbe able to tejerate such a false rumour for long, he'scertain to be very keen to know what stories go roundabout him in the tap-room and in the public rooms, allthis is of the greatest importance to him, and if it'swrong he will refute it at once. But he doesn't refute it ;well, then there is nothing to be refuted and it is sheertruth. What one sees, indeed, is only that Frieda takesthe beer into Klamm's room and comes out again withthe money ; but what one doesn’t see Frieda tells oneabout, and one has to believe her. And she doesn't eventeH^it, after all, she’s not going to let such secrets out ;no, the secrets let themselves out wherever she goes and,since they have been let out once and for all, she herself,it is true, no longer shrinks from talking about themherself, but modestly, without asserting anything, only


THE CASTLE

360
referring to what is generally known anyway. Not toeverything. One thing, for instance, she docs not speakof, namely that since she has been in the tap-roomKlamm drinks less beer than formerly, not much less,but still perceptibly less beer, and there may indeed bevarious reasons for this, it may be that a period has comewhen Klamm has less taste for beer or that it is Friedawho causes him to forget about beer-drinking. Anyway,however amazing it may be, Frieda is Klamm's mistress. 
But how should the others not also admire what is goodenough for Klamm ? And so, before anyone knows whatis happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girlof exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed,almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap-room is hardly good enough for her any more. And, infact, it does strike people as odd that she is still in thetap-room ; being a bar-maid is a great deal, and fromthat point of view the liaison with Klamm seems verycredible, but if the tap-room girl has once becomeKlamm's mistress, why docs he leave her in the tap-room,and so long ? Why docs he not take her up higher ?One can tell people a thousand times that there is nocontradiction here, that Klamm has definite reasons foracting as he does, or that some day, perhaps even at anymoment now, Frieda's elevation will suddenly comeabout ; all this does not make much impression ; peoplehave definite notions and in the long run will not letthemselves be distracted from them by any talk, how-ever ingenious. Nobody any longer doubted that Friedawas Klamm's mistress, even those who obviously kpewbetter were by now too tired to doubt it. ‘ Be Klamm'smistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but ifyou are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.'But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the


THE CASTLE

?6i
tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly gladthat things remained the way they were. But she lostprestige with people, that, of course, she could not failto notice, indeed she usually noticed things even beforethey existed. A really beautiful, fovablc girl, once shehas settled down in the tap-room, does not need todisplay any arts ,* as long as she is beautiful, she willremain tap-room maid, unless spme particularly unfor-tunate accident occurs. But a girl like Frieda must becontinually*worried about her situation, naturally she hasenough sense not to show it, on the contrar)^ she is inthe habit of complaining and cursing the situation. 
But in secret she keeps a weather-eye open all the time. 
And so she saw how people were becoming indiflerent,Frieda’s appearance on the scene was no longer anythingthat made it worth anyone’s while even to glance up,not even the men-servants bothered about her any more,they had enough sense to stick to Olga and girls of thatsort, from the landlord’s behaviour, too, she noticedthat she was becoming less and less indispensable, onecould not go on for ever inventing new stories aboutKlamm, everything has its limits, and so dear Friedadecided to try something new. If anyone had only beencapable of seeing through it immediately ! Pcpi hadsensed it, but unfortunately she had not seen through it. 
Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klamm’s mistress,throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on thelowest of the low. That will make a stir, that will keeppeople talking for a long time, and at last, at last, peoplewd^ remember what it means to be Klamm’s mistress andwhat it means to throw away this honour in the raptureof a new love. The only difficulty was to find thesuitable man with whom the clever game could beplayed. It must not be an acquaintance of Frieda's,


THE CASTLE

362
not even one of the men-servants, for he would probablyhave looked at her askance and have walked on, aboveall he would not have remained serious enough about itand for all her ready tqngue it would have been impossibleto spread the story that she, Frieda, had been attackedby him, had not been able to defend herself against himand in an hour when she did not know what she wasdoing had submitted to iiim. And although it had to beone of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to beone of whom it could be made credible that in spite ofhis crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Friedaherself and had no loftier desire than — heavens above I —to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a commonman, if possible even lower than a servant, much lowerthan a servant, yet it must be one on whose account onewould not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one inwhom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might alsoat some time find something attractive. But where doesone find such a man ? Another girl would probably havespent her whole life looking for him. Frieda^s luckbrought the Land Surveyor into the tap-room to her,perhaps on the very evening when the plan had comeinto her mind for the first time. The Land Surveyor !Yes, what was K. thinking of? What special thingshad he in mind ? Was he going to achieve somethingspecial ? A good appointment, a distinction ? Was heafter something of that sort ? Well, then he ought tohave set about things differently from the very beginning. 
After all, he was a nonentity, it was heart-rending to, yehis situation. He was a Land Surveyor, that wasperhaps something, so he had learnt something, but ifone didn't know what to do with it, then again it wasnothing after all. And at the same time he madedemands, without having the slightest backing, made


THE CASTLE

363
demands not outright, but one noticed that he wasmaking some sort of demands, and that was. after all. 
infuriating. Did he know that even a chamber-maid waslowering herself if she talked to h^m for any length oftime ? And with all these special demands he rumbledheadlong into the most obvious trap on the very firstevening. Wasn*t he ashamed of himself? What was itabout Frieda that he found so •alluring? Could shereally appeal to him, that skinny, sallow thing ? Ah no,he didn't even look at her, she only had to tell him shewas Klamm's mistress, for him that was still a novelty,and so he was lost ! But now she had to move out, now,of course, there was no longer any room for her in theHerrenhof. Pepi saw her the very same morning beforeshe moved out, the staff all came running up, after all,everyone was curious to see the sight. And so great washer power even then that she was pitied, she was pitiedby everyone, even by her enemies ; so correct did hercalculations prove to be from the very start ; havingthrown herself away on such a man seemed incomprehen-sible to everyone and a blow of fate, the little kitchen-maids, who, of course, admire every bar-maid, wereinconsolable. Even Pepi was touched, not even shecould remain quite unmoved, even though her attentionwas actually focussed on something else. She was struckby how little sad Frieda actually was. After all it wasat bottom a dreadful misfortune that had come upon her,and indeed she was behaving as though she were veryunhaj)py, but it was not enough, this acting could notdeceive Pepi. So what was it that was keeping hergoing ? Perhaps the happiness of her new love ? Well,this possibility could not be considered. But what elsecould it be ? What gave her the strength to be as coollypleasant as ever even to Pepi, who was already regarded


THE CASTLE

364
as her successor? Pepi had not then had the time tothink about it, she had had too much to do getting readyfor the new job. She was probably to start on the job <in a few hours and spll had not had her hair done nicely,had no smart dress, no fine underclothes, no decentshoes. All this had to be procured in a few hours ; ifone could not equip oneself properly, then it was betterto give up all thought S^f the situation, for then one wassure of losing it in the very first half-hour. Well, shesucceeded partly. She had a special gift for fiair-dressing,once, indeed, the landlady had sent for her to do her hair,it was a matter of having a specially light hand, and shehad it, of course, her abundant hair was the sort youcould do anything you like with. There was helpforthcoming in ihe matter of the dress too. Her twocolleagues kept faith with her, it was after all a sort ofhonour for them, too, if a girl out of their own groupwas chosen to be bar-maid, and then later on, when shehad come to power, Pepi would have been able to providethem with many advantages. One of the girls had for along time been keeping some expensive material, it washer treasure, she had often let the others admire it, jdoubtless dreaming of how some day she would makemagnificent use of it and — this had been really very nice ^of her — now, when Pepi needed it, she sacrificed it. 
And both girls had very willingly helped her with thesewing, if they had been sewing it for themselves theycould not have been keener. That was indeed a verymerr)^ happy job of work. They sat, each on her bunk,one over the other, sew'ing and singing, and handedeach other the finished parts and the accessories, up anddown. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart everheavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she wasgoing back to her friends with empty hands ! What


THE CASTLE

365
a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* aboveall by K. I How pleased they had all been with thedress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and whenat the last moment it turned out that there was stillroom for another ribbon, the last d6ubt vanished. Andwas it not really beautiful, this dress ? It was crumplednow and showed some spots, the fact was, Pepi had nosecond dress, had to wear this 0115 day and night, but itcould still be seen how beautiful it was, not even thataccursed Ba»nabas woman could produce a better one. 
And that one could pull it tight and loosen it again asone liked, on top and at the bottom, so that although itwas only one dress, it was so changeable — this was aparticular advantage and was actually her invention. Ofcourse it wasn't difficult to make clothes for her, Pepididn't boast of it, there it was — everything suited young,healthy girls. It was much harder to get liold of under-clothing and boots, and here was where the failureactually began. Here, too, her girl friends helped ouras best they could, but they could not do much. It was,after all, only coarse underclothing that they got togetherand patched up, and instead of high-heeled little bootsshe had to make do with slippers, of a kind one wouldrather hide than show. They comforted Pepi : after all,hrieda was not dressed so very beautifully either, andsometimes she went round looking so sluttish that theguests preferred to be served by the cellarmen ratherthan by her. This was in fact so, but Frieda could affordto do that, she already enjoyed favour and prestige ;vvh*it a lady for once makes an appearance lookingbesmirched and carelessly dressed, that is all the morealluring — but in the case of a novice like Pepi ? Andbesides, Frieda could not dress well at all, she was simplydevoid of all taste ; if a person happened to have a


THE CASTLE

566
sallow skin, then, of course, she must put up with it,but she needn't go around, like. Frieda, wearing a low-cutcream blouse to go with it, so that one's eyes were dazzledby all that yellow. And even if it hadn't been for that,she was too mean t6 dress well ; everything she earned,she hung on to, nobody knew what for. She didn't needany money in her job, she managed by means of lyingand trickery, this was^an example Pepi did not want toand could not imitate, and that was why it was justifiablethat she should smarten herself up like this in order toget herself thoroughly noticed right at the beginning. 
Had she only been able to do it by stronger means, shewould, in spite of all Frieda's cunning, in spite of all K.'sfoolishness, have been victorious. After all, it startedvery well. The few tricks of the trade and things it wasnecessary to know she had found out about well before-hand. She was no sooner in the tap-room than she wasthoroughly at home there. Nobody missed Frieda at thejob. It was only on the second day that some guestsenquired what had become of Frieda. No mistake wasmade, the landlord was satisfied, on the first day he hadbeen so anxious that he spent all the time in the tap-room, later he only came in now and then, finally, sincethe money in the till was correct — the takings were onthe average even a little higher than in Frieda's time — heleft everything to Pepi. She introduced innovations. 
Frieda had even supervised the men-servants, at leastpartly, particularly when anyone was looking, and thisnot out of keenness on the work, but out of meanness,out of a desire to dominate, out of fear of letting ailj^oncelse invade her rights, Pepi on the other hand allottedthis job entirely to the cellarmcn, who, after all, aremuch better at it. In this way she had more time leftfor the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ;


THE CASTLE

367
nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment witheveryone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herselfentirely for Klamm and regarded every word, everyapproach, on the part of anyone else as an insult toKlamm. This was, of course, quite clever of her, for, iffor once she did allow anyone to get near her, it was anunheard-of favour. Pepi, however, hated such arts, andanyway they were no use at tly beginning. Pepi waskind to everyone and every^one requited her with kindness. 
All were visibly glad of the change ; when the gentlemen,tired after their work, were at last free to sit down totheir beer for a little while, one could positively transformthem by a word, by a glance, by a shrug of the shoulders. 
So eagerly did all hands stroke Pepi’s curls that she hadto do her hair again quite ten times a day, no one couldresist the temptation offered by these curls and bows,not even K., who was otherwise so absent-minded. Soexciting days flew past, full of work, but successful. Ifonly they had not flown past so quickly, if only therehad been a little more of them ! Four days were toolittle even if one exerted oneself to the point of exhaustion,perhaps the fifth day would have been enough, but fourdays were too little. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well-wishers and friends even in four days, if she had beenable to trust all the glances she caught, when she camealong with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea offriendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazyabout her, gave her this little chain and locket, puttinghis picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazenofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it hadonly been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it,Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ;and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps evensooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great


THE CASTLE

368
scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this wayshe had become new to people, they might have liked tosec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what theyhad come to find boring to the point of disgust had, andthis was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninterestingK., come to have charm for them again, of course theywould not have given up Pepi as long as she was therein front of them and exerting influence by her presence,but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow andheavy in their habits, it took some time for them toget used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageousthe exchange might be, it still took a few days, tooka few days against the gentlemen's own will, only fivedays perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite ofeverything Pepi still counted only as the temporarybar-maid. And then what was perhaps the greatestmisfortune : in these four days, although he had beenin the village during the first two, Klamm did not comedown into the saloon. Had he come, that would havebeen Pepi's most decisive test, a test, incidentally, thatshe was least afraid of, one to which she was moreinclined to look forward. She would — though it is, ofcourse, best not to touch on such things in words at all —not have become Klamm's mistress, nor would she havepromoted herself to that position by telling lies, but shewould have been able to put the beer-glass on the tableat least as nicely as Frieda, have said good-day and goodbyeprettily without Frieda's officiousness, and if Klamm didlook for anything in any girl's eyes at all, he would havefound it to his entire satisfaction in Pepi's eyes. Butwhy did he not come ? Was it chance ? That was vuhatPepi had thought at the time, too. All those two daysshe had expected him at any moment, and in the nightshe waited too. ‘ Now Klamm is coming,' she kept


THE CASTLE

569
1)11 thinking, and dashed to and fro for no other reasonthan the restlessness of expectation and the desire to bethe first to see him, immediately on his entry* Thiscontinual disappointment made her very tired ; pcrliapsthat was why she did not get so n^uch as she could havegot done. Whenever she had a little time she crept upinto the passage that the staff was strictly forbidden toenter, there she would squeeze into a recess and wait. 
' If only Klamm would come ^ow,' she thought, ' ifonly I could take the gentleman out of his room and carryhim down into the saloon on my arms. I should notcollapse under that burden, however great it might be.'But he did not come. In that passage upstairs it was soquiet that one simply couldn't imagine it if one hadn'tbeen there. It was so quiet that one couldn't standbeing there for very long, the quietness drove one away. 
But over and over again : driven away ten rimes, tentimes again Pepi went up there. It was senseless, ofcourse. If Klamm wanted to come, he would come, butif he did not want to come, Pepi would not lure himout, even if the beating of her heart half suflocated herthere in the recess. It was senseless, but if he did notcome, almost everything was senseless. And he did notcome. To-day Pepi knew why Klamm did not come,Frieda would have found it wonderfully amusing if shehad been able to see Pepi up there in the passage, in therecess, both hands on her heart. Klamm did not comedown because Frieda did not allow it. It was not bymeans of her pleading that she brought this about, herpleading did not penetrate to Klamm. But — spider thatsliQ was — she had connections of which nobody knew. IfPepi said something to a guest, she said it openly, thenext table could hear it too. Frieda had nothing to say,she put the beer on the table and went ; there was only


THE CASTLE

?70
the rustling of her silk petticoat, the only thing on whichshe spent money. But if she did for once say something,then not openly, then she whispered it to the guest,bending low so that people at the next table pricked uptheir ears. What she laid was probably quite trivial, butstill, not always, she had connections, she supported theones by means of the others, and if most of them failed- -who would keep on bothering about Frieda ? — still, hereand there one did hold hrm. These connections she nowbegan to exploit. K. gave her the chance to do this ;instead of sitting with her and keeping a watch on her,he hardly stayed at home at all, wandering, havingdiscussions here and there, paying attention to everything,only not to Frieda, and finally, in order to give her stillmore freedom, he moved out of the Bridge Inn into theempty school. A very nice beginning for a honeymoonall this was. Well, Pepi was certainly the last person toreproach K. for not having been able to stand living withFrieda ; nobody coulJ stand living with her. But whythen did he not leave her entirely, why did he time andagain return to her, why did he cause tlie impression, byhis roaming about, that he was fighting for her cause ?It really looked as though it were only through hiscontact with Frieda that he had discovered what anonentity he in fact was, that he wished to make himselfworthy of Frieda, wished to make his way up somehow,and for that reason was for the time being sacrificing hercompany in order to be able later to compensate himselfat leisure for these hardships. Meanwhile Frieda wasnot wasting her time, she sat tight in the school, whareshe had probably led K., and kept the Herrenhof and K. 
under observation. She had excellent messengers at herdisposal : K.*s assistants, whom — one couldn't under-stand it, even if one knew K. one couldn't understand


THE CASTLE

371
it— K. left entirely to hen She sent them to her oldfriends, reminded people of her existence, complainedthat she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incitedpeople against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival,begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing toKlamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to bespared and as if for this reason he must on no account beallowed to come down into tap-room. What sherepresented to one as a way of sparing Klamm’s feelingsshe succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlordwas concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klammdid not come any more. How could he come whendownstairs there was only a Pepi serving ? True, itwasn't the landlord's fault, this Pepi was after all thebest substitute that could be found, only the substitutewasn't good enough, not even for a few days. All thisactivity of Frieda's was something of which K. knewnothing, when he was not roaming about he was lyingat her feet, without an inkling of it, while she countedthe hours still keeping her from the tap-room. But thisrunning of errands was not the only thing the assistantsdid, they also served to make K. jealous, to keep himinterested I Frieda had known the assistants since herchildhood, they certainly had no secrets from each othernow, but in K.'s honour they were beginning to have ayearning for each other, and for K. there arose the dangerthat it would turn out to be a great love. And K. dideverything Frieda wanted, even what was contradictoryand senseless, he let himself be made jealous by thea^iistants, at the same time allowing all three to remaintogether while he went on his wanderings alone. It wasalmost as though he were Frieda's third assistant. Andso, on the basis of her observations, Frieda at last decidedto make her great coup : she made up her mind to return. 



THE CASTLE

372
And it was really high time, it was admirable how Frieda,the cunning aeature, recognised and exploited this fact ;this power of observation and this power of decisionwere Frieda’s inimitable art ; if Pepi had it, howdifferent the course of 'her life would be. If Frieda hadstayed one or two days longer in the school, it would nolonger be possible to drive Pepi out, §he would be bar-maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, havingearned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe inthe most dazzling style, only one or two more» days andKlamm could not be kept out of the saloon by anyintrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortableand, if he noticed Frieda’s absence at all, would behighly satisfied with the change, only one or two moredays and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections,with the assistants, with everything, would be utterlyand completely forgotten, never would she come outinto the open again. Then perhaps she would be able tocling all the more tightly to K. and, assuming that shewere capable of it, would really learn to love him ? No,not that either. For it didn't take even K. more than oneday to get tired of her, to recognise how infamously shewas deceiving him, with everything, with her allegedbeauty, her alleged constancy, and most of all withKlamm's alleged love, it would only take him one daymore, and no longer, to chase her out of the house, andtogether with her the whole dirty set-up with theassistants ; just think, it wouldn't take even K. anylonger than that. And now, between these two dangers,when the grave was positively beginning to close o\*srher — K. in his simplicity was still keeping the lastnarrow road open for her — she suddenly bolted. Sud-denly — hardly anyone expected such a thing, it wasagainst nature — suddenly it was she who drove away K.,


THE CASTLE

^ 7 ?
the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her,and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants,appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of thescandal associated with her much more alluring thanformerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by thehighest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for amoment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and againinaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; onlythat formerly all this was quite properly doubted,whereas how everyone was again convinced. So shecame back, the landlord, with a sidelong glance at Pepi,hesitated — should he sacrifice her, after she had provedher worth so well ? — but he was soon talked over, therewas too much to be said for Frieda, and above all, ofcourse, she would bring Klamm back to the saloon acjnin. 
That is where we stand, this evening. Pepi is not goingto wait till Frieda comes and makes a triumph out oftaking over the job. She has already handed over the tillto the landlady, she can go now. The bunk downstairsin the maids’ room is waiting for her, she will come m,welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rearthe dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, andstuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughlyhidden and won’t be an unneccssarj^ reminder of timesbetter forgotten. Then she will take the big pail andthe broom, clench her teeth, and set to work. In themeantime, however, she had to tell K. everything so thathe, who would not have realised this even now withouthelp, might for once see clearly how horridly he hadtrAted Pepi and how unhappy he had made her. 
Admittedly, he, too, had only been made use of andmisused in all this. 

Pepi had finished. Taking a long breath, she wiped alew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K.,


THE CASTLE

374
nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom whatmattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bearit all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfortfrom anyone at all, and least of all from K., even thoughshe was so young she knew something about life, andher misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knewalready, but what mattered was K., she had wanted toshow him what he himseff was like, even after the collapseof all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. 

“ What a wild imagination you have, Pepi,'' K. said. 
“ For it isn't true at all that you have discovered allthese things only now ; all this is, of course, nothingbut dreams out of that dark, narrow room you chamber-maids have downstairs, dreams that are in their placethere, but which look odd here in the freedom of thetap-room. You couldn't maintain your position herewith such ideas, that goes without saying. Even yourdress and your way of doing your hair, which you makesuch a boast of, are only freaks born of that darkness andthose bunks in your room, there they are very beautiful,I am sure, but here everyone laughs at them, secretly oropenly. And the rest of your story ? So I have beenmisused and deceived, have I ? No, my dear Pepi, I havenot been misused and deceived any more than you have. 
It is true, Frieda has left me for the present or has, asyou put it, run away with one of the assistants, you dosec a glimmer of the truth, and it is really very improbablethat she will ever become my wife, but it is utterly andcompletely untrue that I have grown tired of her and stijlless that I drove her out the very next day or that Ihedeceived me, as other women perhaps deceive a man. 
You chamber-maids arc used to spying through key-*holes, and from that you set this way of thinking, ofdrawing conclusions, as grand as they are false, about the


THE CASTLE

?75
u'hole situation from some little thing you really sec*The consequence of this is that I, for instance, in this caseknow much less than you. I cannot explain by anymeans as exactly as you can why Frieda left me. Themost probable explanation seems to me to be that youhave touched on but not elaborated, which is that Ineglected her. That is unfortunately true, I did neglecther, but there were special reascttis for that, which havenothing to do with this discussion ; I should be happyif she were to come back to me, but I should at oncebegin to neglect her all over again. This is how it is. 
While she was with me I was continually out on thosewanderings that you make such a mock of ; now thatshe is gone I am almost unemployed, am tired, have ayearning for a state of even more complete unemploy-ment, Have you no advice to give me, Pepi ? '* “ Oh
yes, I have,** Pepi said, suddenly becoming animated andseizing K. by the shoulders, we have both beendeceived, let us stick together. Come downstairs withme to the maids ! ** ** So long as you complain about
being deceived,** K. said, ** I cannot come to an under-standing with you. You are always claiming to have beendeceived because you find it flattering and touching. Rutthe truth is that you are not fitted for this job. Howobvious your unfittedness must be when even I, who inyour view know less about things than anyone, can seethat. You are a good girl, Pepi ; but it is not altogethereasy to realise that, I for instance at first took you to becruel and haughty, but you are not so, it is only thisjo6*that confuses you because you are not fitted for it. 

I am not going to say that the job is too grand for you ;It is, after all, not a very splendid job, perhaps, if oneregards it closely, it is somewhat more honourable thanyour previous job, on the whole, however, the difference


THE CASTLE

376
is not great, both arc indeed so similar one can hardlydistinguish between them; indeed, one might almostassert that being a chamber-maid is preferable to the tap-room, for there one is always among secretaries, here, onthe other hand, even though one is allowed to serve thesecretaries' chiefs in the private rooms, still, one also hasto have a lot to do with quite common people, forinstance with me ; actually I am not really supposed tosit about anywhere but right here in the tap-room — ^andis it such a great and glorious honour to assbeiate withme ? Well, it seems so to you, and perhaps you haveyour reasons for thinking so. But precisely that makesyou unfitted. It is a job like any other, but for you it isheaven, consequently you set about everything withexaggerated eagerness, trick yourself out as in youropinion the angels are tricked out — but in reality they aredifferent — tremble for the job, feel you arc constantlybeing persecuted, try by means of being excessivelypleasant to win over everyone who in your opinion mightbe a support to you, but in this way bother them andrepel them, for what they want at the inn is peace andquiet and not the bar-maids' worries on top of their own. 
It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exaltedguests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day theyknow of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Friedadoubtless did manage everything quite differently. 
Whatever she may be like otherwise and however muchshe valued her job, in her work she was greatly experiencedcool and composed, you yourself stress that, thoughadmittedly without learning anything from it. Did ybuever notice the way she looked at things ? That was notmerely a bar-maid's way of looking at things, it wasalmost the way a landlady looks around. She saweverything, and every individual person into the bargain,


THE CASTLE

377

and the ghnee that was left for each individual personwas still intense enough to subdue him. What did itmatter that she was perhaps a little skinny, a littleoldish, that one could imagine cleaner hair ? — those arctrifles compared with what she re'ally had, and anyonewhom these deficiencies disturbed would only haveshown that he lacked any appreciation of greater things. 
One can certainly not charge Klianm with that, and it isonly the wrong point of view of a young, inexperiencedgirl that ifiakes you unable to believe in Klamm’s lovefor Frieda. Klamm seems to you — and this rightly — tobe out of reach, and that is why you believe Friedacould not have got near to him either. You arc wrong. 
I should take Frieda's own word for this, even if I hadnot infallible evidence for it. However incredible itseems to you and however little you can reconcile itwith your notions of the world and officialdom andgentility and the effect a woman's beauty has, still, it istrue, just as we are sitting here beside each other and Itake your hand between my hands, so too, I dare say,and as though it were the most natural thing in the world,did Klamm and Frieda sit beside each other, and he camedown of his own free will, indeed he came hurryingdown, nobody was lurking in the passage waiting forhim and neglecting the rest of the work, Klamm had tobestir himself and come downstairs, and the faults inFrieda's way of dressing, which would have hon ified you,did not disturb him at all. You won't believe her !And you don't know how you give yourself away by this,hotv precisely in this you show your lack of experience !Even someone who knew nothing at all about the affairwith Klamm could not fail to see from her bearing thatsomeone had moulded her, someone who was morethan you and I and all the people in the village and that


THE CASTLE

378
fhcir conversations went beyond the jokes that are usualbetween customers and waitresses and which seem to beyour aim in life. But I am doing you an injustice. Youcan see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you noticeher power of observation, her resolution, her influence onpeople, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly,believing she turns everything self-seekingly to accountonly for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or evenas a weapon against you. No, Pepi, even if she hadsuch arrows, she could not shoot them at %uch shortrange. And self-seeking ? One might rather say thatby sacrificing what she had and what she was entitledto expect she has given us both the opportunity to proveour worth in higher positions, but that we have bothdisappointed her and are positively forcing her to returnhere. I do not know whether it is like this, and my ownguilt is by no means clear to me, only when I comparemyself with you something of this kind dawns on me :it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily,too childishly, with too little experience, to get some-thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda'smatter-of-factness can be got easily and without muchado. We have tried to get it by crying, by scratching, bytugging — just as a child tugs at the tablecloth, gainingnothing, but only bringing all the splendid things downon the floor and putting them out of its reach for ever. 
I don't know whether it is like that, but what I am sureof is that it is more likely to be so than the way youdescribe it as being." " Oh well," Pepi said, " you arein love with Frieda because she's run away from you^'itisn't hard to be in love with her when she's not there. 
But let it be as you like, and even if you are right incvcr)'thing, even in making me ridiculous, what are yougoing to do now ? Frieda has left you, neither according


THE CASTLE

379
ro my explanation nor according to your own have youany hope of her coming back to you, and even if shewere to come back, you have to stay somewhere in themeantime, it is cold, and you have neither work nor abed, come to us, you will like my *girl friends, we shallmake you comfortable, you will help us with our work,which is really too hard for girls to do all by themselves,we girls will not have to rely only^n ourselves and won’tbe frightened any more in the night I Come to us !My girl fnends also know Frieda, we shall tell youstories about her till you are sick and tired of it. Docome ! We have pictures of Frieda too and we’ll showthem to you. At that time Frieda was more modestthan she is to-day, you will scarcely recognise her, onlyperhaps by her eyes, which even then had a suspicious,watchful expression. Well now, are you coming ? ”
' But is it permitted? Only yesterday there was thatgreat scandal because I was caught in your passage.”“ Because you were caught, but when you arc with usyou w^on't be caught. Nobody w'ill know about you,only the three of us. Oh, it will be jolly. Even now lifethere seems much more bearable to me than only a littlewhile ago. Perhaps now I shall not lose so very muchby having to go aw'ay from here. Listen, even with onlythe three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcnthe bitterness of one’s life, it’s made bitter for us whenwe're still young, well, the three of us stick together, welive as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxeparticularly, but you’ll like Emilie too, I've told themabdiit you, there one listens to such tales withoutbelieving them, as though outside the room nothingcould really happen, it’s warm and snug and tight there,and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wchave only each other to rely on, we have not become tired


THE CASTLE

380
of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of mygirl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. 
Why should I get on better than they do ? For that was •just what held us together, the fact that the future wasbarred to all three of us in the same way, and now I havebroken through after all and was separated from them. 
Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my firstconcern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; myown position was still insecure — how insecure it was, Idid not even realise — and I was already talking to the ^landlord about Henriette and Emilie. So far as Henriettcwas concerned the landlord was not quite unrelenting,but for Emilie, it must be confessed, who is much olderthan we are, she's about as old as Frieda, he gave me nohope. But only think, they don't want to go away, theyknow it's a miserable life they lead there, but they haveresigned themselves to it, good souls, I think their tearsas we said goodbye were mostly because they were sadabout my having to leave our common room, going outinto the cold — to us there everything seems cold that isoutside the room — and having to make my way in thebig strange rooms with big strange people, for no otherpurpose than to earn a living, which after all I had ^managed to do up to now in the life we led together. 
They probably won't be at all surprised when now I comeback, and only in order to indulge me they will weep alittle and bemoan my fate. But then they will sec youand notice that it was a good thing after all that I wentaway. It will make them happy that now we have aman as pl helper and protector, and they will be absolfttelydelighted that it must all be kept a secret and thatthrough this secret we shall be still more tightly linkedwith each other than before. Come, oh please come to >us ! No obligation will arise so far as you are concerned, j


THE CASTLE

?8i
you will not be bound to our room for ever, as we arcWhen the spring comes and you find a lodging somcwhcrelse and if you don t like being with us any more, thenyou can go if you want to ; only, of course, you mustkeep the secret even then and not go and betray us, forthat would mean our last hour in the Herrenhof hadcome, and in other respects too, naturally, you must becareful when you are with us,.,not showing yourselfanywhere unless we regard it as safe, and altogether takeour advice ;• that is the only thing that ties you, and thismust count just as much with you as with us, but other-wise you are completely free, the work we shall share outto you will not be too hard, you needn't be afraid of that. 
Well then, are you coming ? " How much longer is ittill spring ? " K. asked. ‘‘ Till spring ? " Pepi repeated. 
“ Winter is long here, a very long winter, andmonotonous. But we don't complain about that downthere, we are safe from the winter. Well yes, some dayspring comes too, and summer, and there's a time forthat too, I suppose ; but in memor)^ now, spring andsummer seem as short as though they didn't last muchlonger than two days, and even on those days, even duringthe most beautiful day, even then sometimes snowfalls."
At this moment the door opened. Pepi started, in herthoughts she had gone too far away from the tap-roorn,but it was not Frieda, it was the landlady. She pretendedto be amazed at finding K. still here. K. excused himselfby saying that he had been waiting for her, and at thesamt^ time he expressed his thanks for having beenallowed to stay here overnight. The landlady could notunderstand why K. had been waiting for her. K. said hehad had the impression that she wanted to speak to himagain, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for


THE CASTLE

382
the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school,where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday'ssummons was to blame for everything, he still had too,little experience of these matters, it would certainly nothappen again that he would cause the landlady suchinconvenience and bother as yesterday. And he bowed,on the point of going. The landlady looked at him asthough she were dreapiing. This gaze kept K. longerthan was his intention. Now she smiled a little, and itwas only the amazement on K.'s face that, as it were,woke her up ; it was as though she had been expectingan answer to her smile and only now, since none came,did she wake up. ‘‘ Yesterday, I think, you had theimpudence to say something about my dress.'" K. couldnot remember. You can't remember ? Then it's notonly impudence, but afterwards cowardice into thebargain." By way of excuse K. spoke of his fatigue ofthe previous day, saying it was quite possible that hehad talked some nonsense, in any case he could notremember now. And what could he have said about thelandlady's clothes ? That they were more beautiful thanany he had ever seen in his life. At least he had neverseen any landlady at her work in such clothes. " That'senough of these remarks! " thc^ landlady said swiftly" I don't want to hear another word from you aboutclothes. My clothes are none of your business. Onceand for all, 1 forbid you to talk about tfiem." K. bowedagain and went to the door. " What do you mean," thelandlady shouted after him, " by saying you've neverbefore seen any landlady at work in such clojtes 'What do you mean by making such senseless remarks ?It's simply quite senseless. What do you mean by it ? ”K. turned round and begged the landlady not to getexcited. Of course the remark was senseless. After all,


THE CASTLE

he knew nothing at all about clothes. In his sitiwtionany ckess that happened to be clean and not patchedseemed luxurious. He had only been amazed at thelandlady's appearing there, in the passage, at night,among all those scantily dressed men, in such a beautifulevening-dress, that was ail. Well now," the landladysaid, " at last you seem to have remembered the remarkyou made yesterday, after all. Aryl you put the finishing-touch to it by some more nonsense. It's quite true youdon't know anything about clothes. But then kindlyrefrain — this is a serious request I make to you — fromsetting yourself up as a judge of what are luxuriousdresses or unsuitable evening-dresses, and the like. . . . 
And let me tell you " — here it seemed as if a coldshudder went through her — " you’ve no business tomterfere with my clothes in any way at all, do you hear ? "And as K. was about to turn away again in silence, sheasked : " Where did you get your knowledge of clothes,anyway ? " K, shrugged his shoulders, saying he hadno knowledge. " You have none," the landlady said. 
" Very V ^11 then, don’t set up to have any, either. 
Come over to the office. I'll show you something, thenI hope you'll stop ycur impudent remarks for good."She went through the door ahead of him ; Pepi rusliedforward to K., on the pretext of settling the bill : theyquickly ma^e their plans, it was very easy, since K. 
knew the courtyard with the gate opening into the side-street, beside the gate there was a little door behindwhich Pepi would stand in about an hour and open iton hearing a three-fold knock. 

Tfie private office was opposite the tap-room, they onlyhad to cross the hall, the landlady was already standingin the lighted office and impatiently looking towards K. 
^ut there was yet another disturbance. Gerstacker liad


THE CASTLE

384
been waiting in the hall and wanted to talk to K. It wasnot easy to shake him off, the landlady also joined inand rebuked Gerstacker for his intrusiveness. Whereare you going ? Where are you going ? " Gerstackercould still be heard tailing out even after the door wasshut, and the words were unpleasantly interspersed withsighs and coughs. 

It was a small, overiheated room. Against the end-walls were a standing-desk and an iron safe, against theside-walls were a wardrobe and an ottoman. • It was thewardrobe that took up most room ; not only did itoccupy the whole of the longer wall, its depth also madethe room very narrow, it had three sliding-doors by whichit could be opened completely. The landlady pointed tothe ottoman, indicating that K. should sit down, sheherself sat down on the revolving chair at the desk. 
** Didn't you once learn tailoring ? " the landlady asked. 
** No, never," K. said. " What actually is it you are ? "** Land Surveyor." " What is that ? " K. explained,the explanation made her yawn. " You're not tellingthe truth. Why won't you tell the truth ? " " You
don't tell the truth either." " I ? So now you'rebeginning your impudent remarks again? And if Ididn't tell the truth — do I have to answer for it to you ?And in what way don't I tell the truth then ? " "Youare not only a landlady, as you pretend." " Just listento that I All the things you discover ! What else am Ithen ? But I must say, your impudence is gettingthoroughly out of hand." "I don't know whar elseyou are. I only see that you arc a landlady and also v^arclothes that are not suitable for a landlady and of a kindthat to the best of my knowledge nobody else wears herein the village." " Well, now we're getting to the point. 
The fact is you can't keep it to yourself, perhaps you


THE CASTLE

385
aren't impudent at all, you're only like a child thatknows some silly thing or other and which simply can't,by any means, be made to keep it to itself. Well, speakup ! What is so special about these clothes ? " You'llbe angiy if I say." " No, I shall laugh about it, it'll besome childish chatter. What sort of clothes are theythen ? " You insist on hearing. Well, they're madeof good material, pretty expensive, but they arc old-hishioned, fussy, often renovated, worn, and not suitableeither for your age or for your figure or for your position. 
I was struck by them the very first time I saw you, itwas about a week ago, here in the hall." " So there nowwe have it I They are old-fashioned, fussy, and what elsedid you say ? And what enables you to judge all this ? "" I can see for myself, one doesn't need any training forthat." "You can see it without more ado. You don'thave to enquire anywhere, you know at once what isrequired by fashion. So you're going to be quiteindispensable to me, for I must admit I have a weaknessfor beautiful clothes. And what will you say when 1 tellyou that this wardrobe is full of dresses ? " She pushedthe sliding doors open, one dress could be seen tightlypacked against the next, filling up the whole length andbreadth of the wardrobe, they were mostly dark, grey,brown, black dresses, all carefully hung up and spreadour. " These are my dresses, all old-fashioned, fussy,as you think. But they are only the dresses for which Ihave no room upstairs in my room, there 1 have two morewardrobes full, two wardrobes, each of them almost asbig tis this one. Are you amazed ? " " No, I was
expecting something of the sort ; didn't I say you renot only a landlady, you're aiming at something else."" I am only aiming at dressing beautifully, and you arceither a fool or a child or a very' wicked, dangerous
13


THE CASTLE

386
person. Go, go away now ! " K. was already in tlichall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again,when the landlady shouted after him : “ I am gettinga new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send foryou. 




APPENDIX

I
CONTINUATION OF THE MANUSCRIPT

2
ANOTHER VERSION OF THE OPENINGPARAGRAPHS

3
FRAGMENTS

4
TWO ADDITIONAL PASSAGES INCLUDED INTHE TEXT OF THE DEFINITIVE GERMANEDITION

5
THE PASSAGES DELETED BY THE AUTHOR

38S


APPENDIX

1
CONTINUATION OF THE MANUSCRIPT
Gerstacljer, angrily gesticulating, as if trying from adistance to silence the landlady, who was disturbing him,asked K. to go with him. At first he would not giveany further explanation. He took hardly any notice ofK.'s objection that he must now go back to the school. 
Only when K. protested at being hauled away by himdid Gerstacker tell him there was nothing to worryabout, he would get everything he needed at his house,he could give up the job as janitor at the school, onlyhe was to come along without further delay, he Iiad beenwaiting for him all day, his mother had no idea where hewas. Slowly giving way to him, K. asked what, then, hewas going to provide board and lodging for. Gerstackeranswered only vaguely that he needed K. to help with thehorses, for he himself had other business to attend to,but now K. was to stop resisting like this and makingunnecessary difficulties for him. If he wanted wages, hewould give him wages too. But now K. stopped, in spiteof all the tugging. He said he did not know anythingat all about horses. Nor was it necessary that he should,Gerstacker said impatiently and clasped his hands inannoyance, in order to induce K. to come on. “ I knowwhy you want to take me with you,” K. said at length. 
Gerstacker did not know what K. knew. “ Because youthink I can do something for you with Erlanger.”
3*9


THE CASTLE

390
Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should Ihave in you otherwise ? " K. laughed, linked arms withGerstackcr and let himself be led through the darknessby him. ,
The room in Gcrstacker's hovel was only dimly lit bythe fire in the hearth and by a stub of candle, by thelight of which someone hunched up in a recess under theslanting rafters, which overhung there, was reading a book. 
It was Gcrstacker's mother. She held out a tremuloushand to K. and made him sit down beside hcr,*she spokewith an effort, it was difficult to understand her, butwhat she said,

ANOTHER VERSION
Now Gerstackcr thought his time had come at last. 
Despite the fact that he had all the time been trying togain a hearing with K., he began, he obviously could nothelp it, rather roughly. Have you got a job ? he asked. 
** Yes,*’ K. said, ‘‘a very good one.'* ‘'Where?"" At the school." " But you're a Land Surveyor, aren'tyou ? " "Yes, but it's only a temporary job, I'm onlystaying on there till I get the certificate of my appointmentas Land Surveyor. Do you understand ? " "Yes, andwill that take much longer? " " No, no, it may come
at any moment, I was talking to Erlanger about ityesterday." "To Erlanger?" "You know I was. 
Don't be tiresome. Go away. Leave me alone."" Well yes, you've spoken to Erlanger. I thought it wasa secret." " I wouldn't share my secrets with you. 
After all, you're the fellow who snarled at me when Igot stuck in the snow outside your door." " Yes, butthen I drove you to the Bridge Inn, didn't I ? " " That's


THE CASTLE

want ? '' Have you any money to spare ? Do you get
good wages at the school?" " Enough to live on."“ I could tell you of a job where you'd get better pay."" With you, I suppose, with the h9rses ? No thanks."" Who told you ? " " You've been hanging about sincelast night, trying to get hold of me." " You're verymuch mistaken there." " If I'm mistaken, so much thebetter.' " Only now, seeing you in your desperate.situation, ^ou, a Land Surveyor, an educated man. indirty, ragged clothes, without a fur coat, so down andout that it's quite heart-rending, hand-in-glovc with thatlittle wretch Pepi, who's probabi)' supporting you, onlynow I've remembered what my mother once said :
‘ This man shouldn't be let go to the dogs " A goodsaying. That's the very reason why I'm not coming\ ou."

2
ANOTHER VERSION OF THE OPENINGPARAGRAPHS
The landlord welcomed the guest. A room on thelirst floor had been got ready. " The royal apartment,”rhe landlord said. It was a large room with two windowsand a glass door between them, it was distressingly largein its bareness. The few pieces of furniture that stoodabout in it had strangely thin legs, one might havethought they were made of iron, but they were made ofwood. " Kindly do not step out on the balcony,’ thelandlord said, when the guest, after he had looked outof one of the windows, into the night, approached rheglass door. " The beam is slightly rotten." The


THE CASTLE

392
chamber-maid came in and busied herself at the wash-stand, at the same time asking whether the room waswarm enough. The guest nodded. But although he hadup to now found nQ fault with the room, he was stillwalking up and down fully dressed, in his overcoat,with his stick and hat in his hand, as though it were notyet settled whether he would stay here. The landlordwas standing beside ttie chamber-maid. Suddenly theguest stepped up behind the two of them and exclaimed :“ Why are you whispering ? Frightened, tiie landlordsaid : ''I was only giving the maid instructions aboutthe bedclothes. The room is unfortunately, as I onlynow see, not so carefully prepared as I should have wished. 
But everything will be done in a moment.*' ** That's northe point," the guest said, " I expected nothing but afilthy hovel and a repulsive bed. Don't try to distract myattention. There's only one thing I want to know ; whoinformed you in advance of my arrival ? " " Nobody,
sir," the landlord said. " You were expecting me." " Iam an innkeeper and expect guests." " The room wasprepared." " As always." " Very well then, you knewnothing, but I am not going to stay here." And hepushed a window open and shouted out of it : " Don’tunharness, we're driving on ! " But as he hurried to thedoor, the chamber-maid stepped in his way, a weakly, infact far too young, frail girl, and said with lowered head :" Don't go away ; yes, we were expecting you, it wasonly because we are clumsy at answering, uncertain ofyour wishes, that we concealed it." The girl's appearancetouched the guest ; her words seemed to him suspiftous. 
" Leave me alone with the girl," he said to the landlord. 
The landlord hesitated, then he went. " Come," theguest said to the girl, and they sat down at the table. 

' What is your name ? " the guest asked, reaching across


THE CASTLE

m
the tabic and taking the girl's hand Elisabeth," shesaid. Elisabeth, he said, “ listen to me carefully. 
I have a difficult task ahead of me and have dedicated mywhole life to it. I do it joyfully ^nd ask for nobody'spity. ‘But because it is all I have, the task I mean. Iruthlessly suppress everjThing that might disturb me incarr^’ing it out. I tell you, I can be mad in my ruthlcss-ness." He pressed her hand, slic gazed at him andnodded. "Well, so you have understood that," he said,“ now explain to me how you people learnt of my arrival. 
That is all I want to know, I am not asking what viewsyou hold. I am here to fight, certainly, but I don'twant to be attacked before my arrival. Well, whathappened before I came ? " " The whole village knows
of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known forveeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't knowany more than that." " Someone from the Castle washere and announced I was coming?" " No, nobodywas here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associateu'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it,people from the village may have heard it, so it gotaround perhaps. So few strangers come here, after all,people talk a lot about a stranger." " Few strangers ? "the guest asked. " Alas," the girl said and smiled — shelooked both confiding and aloof — " nobody comes, it is asthough the world had forgotten us." " Why shouldanyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, isthere anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowlywitjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. 

“ A Ad rightly," the guest said and stood up. "You areall a crowd of villains, but you are even more dangerousthan the landlord. You have been specially sent from theCastle to wait on me." " Sent from the Castle ? thegirl said. " How little you know conditions here I It


THE CASTLE

J96
never had any hope of being admitted into the Castlechanceries. He contents himself with the secretaries,when they come down from the Castle to the Herrenhof,now he has to undergo day interrogations, now nightinterrogations, and he's always prowling around theHerrenhof, like the foxes round the hen-house, only thatin reality the secretaries are the foxes and he is the hen. 
But that is only by the way, I was going to tell you aboutBiirgel. Well then, last night K. was summoned to theHerrenhof once again in connection with his affair, to seeSecretary Erlanger, with whom he mainly has to do. He’salways in raptures over such a summons, in this respectdisappointments have no effect on him — if only onecould learn that from him I Each new summonsreinforces, not his old disappointments, but only his oldhope. Lent wings by this summons, then, he hurries tothe Herrenhof. Admittedly he is not in a good state,he was not expecting the summons, hence he had goneon various errands in the village with regard to his cause,you know by this time he has more connections here thanfamilies that have been living here for centuries, all theseconnections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyoraffair of his and, since they are the result of hard fightingand have to be fought for over and over again, an eyemust be kept on them all the time. You must get aproper picture of this, all these connections are positivelylying in wait for a chance to slip away from him. Andso he constantly has his hands full, looking after them. 
And yet he finds the time to have long discussions \yithme or anyone else about quite irrelevant things, but? thisonly for the reason that nothing is so irrelevant that inhis opinion it is not connected with his affair. So he isalways at work ; actually it never struck me that hesleeps too. Yet this is the case, sleep does in fact play


THE CASTLE

397
the main part in the affair with Biirgeh The fact isthat when he hurried into the Herrenhof to see Erlanger,he was already immeasurably tired, after all he had notbeen prepared for the summons and had frivolouslywasted his energy, not having slept at all the night before,and the two previous nights each only two or three hours. 
For this reason, though Erlanger^s summons, made outfor midnight, made him happy, a# any such slip of paperdoes, at the same time it made him worried about thecondition lie was in, which might prevent him frombeing as much of a match for the strain of the interviewas he would otherwise have been. So he arrives at theHerrenhof, goes into the passage where the secretarieshave their rooms and there, to his misfortune, meets achamber-maid he knows. He has no lack of affairs withwomen, you know, and all for the good of his cause. 
This girl had something to tell him about another girl healso knew, drew him into her little room, he followed — itwas not yet midnight — for it is his principle never to missany opportunity of learning anything new. This, indeed,besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps veryoften, produces great disadvantages too, as it did thistime, for instance, for, when he got away from thegossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and wasout in the passage again, it was four o’clock. He couldthink of nothing but not missing the appointment withErlanger. He fortified himself a little, perhaps indeedtoo much, from a decanter of rum that he found on atray forgotten in a corner, tiptoed along the long passage,at other times so full of bustle and now as quiet as apath through a cemetery, till he came to the door thathe took to be Erlanger *s door, didn’t knock, in order notto wake Erlanger, supposing he were asleep, but openedthe door at once, though with extreme caution. And


THE CASTLE

J98
now I am going to tell you the story as well as I canword for word, and as much in detail as K. told it to meyesterday with all the signs of mortal despair. I hopehe has meanwhile been consoled by a new summons. Butthe story itself is really too funny, just listen : what isactually so funny about it is, of course, his own pain-stakingly detailed account, and a good deal of that willget lost in my re-telliAg of it. If I could really bring itout, it would give you a full-length picture of K. himself,though of Biirgel hardly a trace. If I could brhig it out —that is the pre-condition. For otherwise the story mayequally well turn out to be very boring, it contains thatelement coo. But let us risk it. 


. • . shaking hands, saying goodbye, but I was veryglad to have this talk with you, it is positively a weight offmy mind. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.''
** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. 
said and bowed over Mizzi's hand, he wanted to get thebetter of his feelings and kiss it, but Mizzi pulled itaway with a little scream of fright and hid it under thepillow. " Mizzi, Mizzi, my pet," the Mayor saidindulgently and affectionately, stroking her back. 

" You are always welcome," he said, perhaps in orderto help K. to overlook Mizzi's behaviour, but then headded : " Particularly now, as long as I am ill. WhenI am able to get back to my desk, of course, I shall bequite taken up with official work." " Do you inteqd toconvey by that," K. asked, " that even you were notspeaking to me officially to-day ? "
" Certainly," the Mayor said, " I have never spokento you officially, one may perhaps call it semi-officially. 



THE CASTLE

You underrate the non-official clement, as I said before,but you also underrate the official element. An officialdecision is, after all, not just something like, for instance,this medicine bottle, standing here on this little table. 
One reaches out for it and has it. 'A real official decisionis preceded by innumerable little investigations andconsiderations, it requires years of work by the bestofficials, even in a case when rfiese officials happen toknow from the very beginning what the final decisionis. Andfis there then any such thing as a final decision?The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it fromarising.**
“ Well, yes,** K. said, “ it’s all excellently organised,who still doubts that ? But you have expounded it to mein general far too alluringly for me not to exert myselfnow, with all my strength, to get to know it in derail.”
Bows were exchanged, and K. left. The asMstantsremained behind to take a special farewell, with whis-pering and laughter, but soon followed. 

At the inn K. found his room beautified to the pointof being unrecognisable. This was all the doing ofFrieda, who received him with a kiss on the threshold. 
The room had been thoroughly aired, the stove wellstoked up, the floor washed/the bed tidied, the maids’things, including their pictures, had all gone, thcie wasonly one new photograph now' hanging on the wall overthe bed. K. went nearer, pictures . . . 


. . . on the contrary, wherever I wanted, and with thepassionate enthusiasm of children, into the bargam. Inthis hasty walking to and fro I found myself for t cmoment beside Amalia, gently rook the knitting out oi


THE CASTLfi

400
her hand and threw it on the table, at which the rest ofthe family was already sitting. “ What are you doing ?Olga exclaimed. “ Oh/' I said, half angrily, halfsmiling, " you all annoy me." And I sat down in thechimney-corner, taking on my lap a little black cat thathad been sleeping there. How much a stranger and yethow much at home I was there, I had not yet shaken handswith the two old peopldif had scarcely spoken to the girlsany more than I had to this new Barnabas, as he hereseemed to me to be, and yet I was sitting h^te in thewarmth, unheeded, because I had already quarrelled alittle with the girls, and the friendly cat scrambled upmy chest on to my shoulder. And even if I had beendisappointed here, too, still, it was from here, too, thatnew hopes came. Barnabas had not gone to the Castlenow, but he would go in the morning, and even if thatgirl from the Castle did not come here, another onewould. 


Frieda also waits, but not for K. ; she watches theHerrenhof and watches K. ; she has no need to worry,her situation is more favourable than she herself expected,she can look on without envy at how Pepi exerts herself,at how Pepi's reputation grows, she will, of course, put astop to it when the time comes, she can also afford tolook on calmly, watching K. knocking about, away fromher, she will see to it that he doesn't leave her for good. 



4

TWO ADDITIONAL PASSAGES INCLLT)ED INTHE TEXT OF THE DEFINITIVE GERMANEDITION
(l). Reference : Fischer edition, p. 197, 1 . 16, to end ofparagraph (over), English, Muir translation, p. 185,1. 22, after ** he, Hans, could see through."
In fact Hans was now seeking K.*s aid against hisfather ; it was as if he had been deluding himself inbelieving he wanted to help K., when in reality he hadbeen wanting to discover whether, since nobody in lusold surroundings had been able to help, this suddennewcomer, who had now even been mentioned by hismother, might perhaps be capable of doing so. Howunconsciously secretive, almost underhand, this boy was. 
Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather thisfrom his appearance and his speech ; one observed itonly in the confessions wormed out of him as it wereafter the event, by chance or by deliberation. And now,in long discussions with K., he considered the difficultiesthat would have to be overcome. With the best of goodwill on Hans's part, they remained almost insurmountabledifficulties ; lost in thought and at the same time gropingfor help, he kept gazing at K. with restlessly blinkingejics. He could not say anything to his mother beforehis* father left, otherwise his father would come to hearof it and the whole plan would be scotched, and so hecould only mention it later ; but even then, out ofconsideration for his mother, it could not be mentioned
401


THE CASTLE

402
suddenly and startlingly, but must be said slowly andwhen a suitable opportunity occurred ; only then couldhe beg his mother to agree, only then could he fetch K. 
But would it not be too late by that time, would therenot be danger of his father's returning by then ? No, itwas impossible after all. K., on the contrary, provedthat it was not impossible. One need not be afraid thatthere would not be enoifigh time, a short conversation, ashort meeting, would be sufficient, and Hans would notneed to fetch K. K. would be in hiding sbmewherenear the house and would come at once on getting a signfrom Hans. No, Hans said, K. must not wait near thehouse — again it was sensitiveness on his mother's accountthat dictated his reaction — K. must not start without hismother's knowledge, Hans must not enter into such asea*et agreement with K., deceiving his mother ; hemust fetch K. from the school, and this not before hismother knew of it and gave permission. All right, K. 
said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then itwas possible that Hans's father would catch him in thehouse ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of itHans’s mother would not let K. come at all, and so thewhole plan would be frustrated because of his fatherafter all. To this Hans had another objection to make,and so the argument went on and on
(2). Reference : Fischer edition, p. 217, 1 . 15, to end ofparagraph (over), English, Muir translation, p. 202,z lines from end, after “ bask in her wrath and
M «
nearness. ^
His greatest pleasure was to sit beside Gisa, correaingexercises. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way,Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the


THE CASTLE

403
teacher always gave them his as well, and so long asdaylight lasted K. had seen the two of them working ata little table in the window, their heads close together,motionless ; now all there was to be seen there was theflickering of two candles. It was a solemn, taciturn lovethat united them ; it was indeed Gisa who set the tone,for though her slow-blooded temperament sometimeswent wild and broke through afl barriers, at other timesshe would never have tolerated anything of the sort inothers ; so even the vivacious Schwarzer had to knuckleunder, walking slowly, speaking slowly, and oftenremaining silent ,* but it was plain that he was riclilyrewarded for all this by Gisa’s mere quiet presence. Andyet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ;at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, inwhich only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answerto such questions ,* all that could be seen was that sheput up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it wascertain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it wasto be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump,voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whetherSchwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. 
Schwarzer, on the other hand, made a permanentsacrifice for her sake by remaining in the village ;messengers from his father, who frequently came to fetchhim home, he sent about their business as indignantlyas if even the brief reminder of the Castle and of hisduty as a son that they constituted were a grave andipreparable injury to his happiness. And yet he actuallyh»d plenty of time on his hands, for Gisa generallycondescended to see him only during school hours andwhile correcting exercises, not, it must be admitted, outof calculation, but because what she loved more thananything was being comfortable, which meant being


THE CASTLE

404
alone, and she was probably happiest when at home shecould stretch out on the sofa, entirely at her ease, besideher the cat, which did not disturb her because, indeed,it was scarcely capable of moving any more at all. SoSchwarzer spent a large part of the day drifting roundwithout anything to do, but even this suited him, for itmeant that he always had the chance, which he very oftentook, of going down Liofl Street, where Gisa lived, goingupstairs to her little attic, listening at the ever-lockeddoor, and then hurriedly retreating, after he hSld everytime observed that the most complete and baffling silencereigned within the room. Nevertheless, even in him theconsequences of such a mode of life made themselvesapparent, sometimes — though never in Gisa's presence —in ludicrous outbursts of a momentarily re-awakenedofficial arrogance, which certainly ill accorded with hispresent situation ; and then, to be sure, things did notusually turn out very well, as K. had seen for himself. 


5
THE PASSAGES DELETED BY THE AUTHORP. 22, 1 . 5. 

But was it acquaintances he was making ? Did he geteven a single frank, cordial word ? As was indeednecessary. For it was clear to him that wasting onlya few days here would make him incapable of everacting decisively. Nevertheless he must not do anythinghasty. 

P. 34. 1-31-
But after a moment he regained his composure andsaid : ** My master wishes to know when he is to come


THE CASTLE

405
to the Castle to-morrow/' The answer : ** Tell yourmaster, but do not forget a single word of the incss^igc :Even if he sends ten assistants to ask when he is to comehe will always get the answer : Neither to-morrow nor atany other time." K. would have best liked to put tliereceiver down instantly. A conversation like this couldnot get him anywhere. He must set about it in someother way, this was clear to luni; in some way c]uitedifferent from, for instance, a conversation like this. 
In this way he was not fighting the others, hut onlyhimself. Of course, he had arrived yesterday, and theCastle had been here since ancient times. 

P.43. 1-13*
As K. always had notions with regard to this man thateven to him did not seem to be in accordance with reality,as though it were not one man but two, and only K., andnot reality, were capable of keeping them distinct fromeach other, so he now believed that it was not his cunning,but his worried, faintly hopeful face, which he must haverecognised even in the night, had induced him to takehim along with him. On this his hope was based. 

P. 47. 1. 2 . 

K. turned round in order to find his coat, he wanted toput it on, wet as it was, and return to the inn, difficultas it might be. He thought it necessary to confessfrankly that he had let himself be deceived, and onlyreturning to the inn seemed to him a sufficient confessionof this. Above all, however, he did not want to let anyuiKertainty arise in his own mind, did not want to losehimself in an enterprise that after such great initialhopes had turned out to be without prospects. He shookoff a hand tugging at his sleeve, without looking to seewhose hand it was. 



THE CASTLE

406
Then he heard the old man saying to Barnabas :** The girl from the Castle was here/' After that theytalked together in low voices. K. had by now becomeso mistrustful that he ^watched them for a little whilein order to make sure whether this remark had not beenintentionally made for his benefit. But this was doubtlessnot the case, the talkative father, now and then supportedby the mother, had all sorts of things to tell Barnabas ;Barnabas liad bent down to him and while listening hesmiled across at K., as though he were meant to joinhim in his delight over his father. Now this K. did notdo, but all the same he did look at this smile for amoment in astonishment. Then he turned to the girlsand asked : “ Do you know her ? " They did not knowwhat he meant, and they were a little disconcerted, too,because he had, without meaning it, uttered his questionquickly and sternly. He explained to them that hemeant the girl from the Castle. Olga, the more gentleof the two — she even showed a trace of maidenlyembarrassment, whereas Amalia looked at him with aserious, straight, unwavering, perhaps even slightly dullgaze — answered; “The girl from the Castle? Ofcourse we know her. She was here to-day. Do youknow her too ? I thought you arrived only yesterday."“ Yesterday, that's right. But I met her to-day, weexchanged a few words, but then we were interrupted. 
I should like to see her again." To diminish the effectof what he said, K. added ; “ She wanted some adviceabout something." But now he found Amalia's ga^eirritating, and he said : “ What's the matter with
you ? Please don't keep on looking at me like that."But instead of apologising, Amalia only shrugged hershoulders and moved away, went to the table, took up astocking she was knitting, and took no more notice of K. 



THH CASTl.E

407
Olga, in an effort to make up, on her side, for Amalia’sbad manners, said i She 11 probably be coming to seeus again to-morrow, then you can talk to her.” “ Allright, K. said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it istrue i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemann’s, butI prefer to stay with you people.*’ ** At Lasemann’s ? "
Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then it’s amisunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one whowas at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once ! "K. exclaimed and began walking up and down the room,inconsiderately crossing it from one side to the otluT. 
A strange mixture these people's behaviour seemed to be :in spite of occasional friendliness they were cold, reserved,and even suspicious, they sometimes turned up treacher-ously in the name of unknown masters, but all this wasat least partially counterbalanced — one could, admittedly,also say made more acute, bur K. did not regard it inthis way, that was not in keeping with his nature — byawkwardness, by childishly slow and childishly timidthinking, even indeed by a certain docility. If onesucceeded in making use of what was obliging in theircharacter and avoiding what was hostile — something,indeed, that required more than ingenuity and for whichone probably, alas, needed help even from them - thenthey would no longer be an obstacle, then they would notthrust K. back any more, as had happened to him all thetime up to now, then they would bear him along. 

P. 59, I 5. 

K. was thinking more of Klamm than of her. Theconquest of Frieda meant making a change in his plans :here he gained a means to power that might make thewhole period of work in the village unnecessary. 



THE CASTLE

408
P. 59 » 13*
... lay then, almost undressed, for each of them hadtorn open the other's clothes with hands and teeth, inthe little puddles of beer. 

P. 79. I* 19-
He was, after all, by now well able to play on thisdepartmental machinery^ this delicate instrument alwaystuned for some compromise or other. The art of it layessentially in doing nothing, leaving the machinery towork by itself and forcing it to work by the mere factof oneself being there, irremovable in one's ponderousmortality. 

P. 86, 1 . 17 (variant reading). 

Allow me, Mr. Mayor, to interrupt you with aquestion," K. said, leaning back comfortably in his chair,but no longer feeling so much at ease as he had previously ;the Mayor's mania for imparting information, which hehimself had constantly been endeavouring to stimulate,was now too much for him, " did you not a little whileago mention a Control Authority ? . . 

P. 89, 1 . 10. 

Now I can't go rushing along to the Town Council withevery letter from the authorities, but Sordini didn't knowof that letter, you know, he denied its existence, and so,of course, I seemed to be put in the wrong. 

P. 94, 1 . 18. 

My interpretation is different, I shall stick to it eventhough I also have quite different weapons, and shall ^^oall I can to get it acknowledged. 

P. no, 1 . 31. 

" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landladysaid, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by


THE CASTLE

409
accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that timedeputising for the head of anotlier department, that’swhy it says : ‘ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.’I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrar’s officewith* the document, didn’t even take off my wedditig-dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document,read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildisheagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate thesignature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers ofpaper with writing, and never noticed that Hans wasstanding behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, andwatching me at my work. Unforiunateiy then, whenthe document had been signed by evervone concerned, ithad to be handed in to the Municipality.”
” Well,” K. said, ” I didn’t mean an enquir}^ likethat, indeed nothing official at all, it is not Klamm theofficial one must speak to, but the private person. Theofficial aspect of things here is mostly wrong, you see :for instance, if to-day you had only seen the MunicipalRecords on the floor, as I did ! And among tlicm,perhaps, your beloved certificate, always assuming that itis not kept in the barn where the rats are — I think youwould have agreed with me.”
P. Ill, 1 . 18. 

Perhaps it is also a legend, besides, but then it is certainlyone that is invented only by those who have beenabandoned, as a consolation for their life. 

P.«i II, 1 . 31. 

” Gladly,” K. said. ” And so here now is what I amgoing to say. I could put it more or less like tliis :
* We, Frieda and I, love each other and want to marry assoon as possible. Yet Frieda loves not only me, but y/ju


THE CASTLE

410
too, though admittedly in quite a different way, it isnot my fault that language is so poor that it has onlyone word for both. Frieda herself does not understandhow it comes about that there is room in her heart forme too, and she can only think that it became possiblesolely by your will. After everything I have heard fromFrieda, I can only associate myself with her view. 
However, it is only an assumption, apart from which theonly thing I can think of is that I, a stranger, a nonentity,as the landlady calls me, have pushed my way in betweenFrieda and you. In order to have certainty on this pointI take the liberty of asking you how the matter stands inreality.* That, then, would be the first question ; Ithink it would be respectful enough.'*
The landlady sighed. ** Oh, what a person you are,”she said, seemingly clever enough, but at the same timeabysmally ignorant. You think you can negotiate withKlamm as if he were your fiancee’s father, more or lessas if you had fallen in love with Olga — unfortunately youhaven't — you would have spoken to old Barnabas. Whata wise disposition of things it is that you will never havea chance to talk to Klamm.”
” This interpolation,” K. said, ” I should not haveheard during my conversation with him, which in anycase would have to be conducted and therefore
I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. 
As regards his answer, how'ever, there are three possi-bilities. Either he will say ; ‘ It was not my will,' or :‘ It was my will,' or he will say nothing. The fi;;stpossibility I am provisionally excluding from cnyspeculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration foryou ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret asagreement.”
” There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more


THE CASTLE

411
plausible ones,” the landlady said, ” if I do enter intoyour fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance,the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standingthere.”
“That would change nothing,” K. said. “I shouldstep in his way and compel him to hear me.”
“Compel him to hear you !_” the landlady said. 
“ Compel the lion to eat straw ! What deeds ofheroism ! ”
“ Always so irritable, Landlady,” K. said. “ Rut I amonly answering your questions, I am not forcing con-fidences on you. In any case, w'e are nor talking a hour alion at all, we are talking about the head of a department,and if I take the lion's lioness away from him and marryher, I suppose I shall at any rate have so much significancein his eyes that he will at least listen to me.”
P. 112, 1 . 16. 

“ You are lost, here among us, Land Surveyor,” thelandlady said, “ everything you say is full of misconcep-tions. Perhaps Frieda, as your wife, will be able tosupport you here, but it is almost too bard a task for thatfrail little thing. And she knows it, too ; w hen shethinks there is nobody watching her, she sighs and hereyes are full of tears. True, my husband is a burden tome too, but after all, he doesn't try to take the helm,and even if he did try, he might do something stupid, Idare say, but, as a native, nothing, after all, tliat wouldbe^ ruinous ; but you are full of very dangerous mis-conceptions and you will never lose them. Klamrn as aprivate person. Who has ever seen Klamm as a privateperson ? Who can imagine him as a private person ?You can, you will object, but there you are, rhar sprecisely the misfortune. You can do it because you


THE CASTLE

412
can't imagine him as an ofiicial, because you simply can’timagine him at all. Because Frieda was Klamm'smistress, you think she saw him as a private person,because we love him,^ you think we love him as a privateperson. Now, one cannot say of a real oiEcial that he issometimes more and sometimes less of an official, for heis always an official, to full capacity. But in order atleast to give you a clue to understanding I shall this timedisregard it, and then I can say : Never was he more of anofficial than then at the time of my liappiness, and I andFrieda are unanimous in this : we love no one but theofficial Klamm, the high, the exceedingly high, official."
P. 129, 1 . 10. 

And yet, when K. saw her sitting there, on Frieda'schair, beside the room . . . perhaps still harbouredKlamm to-day, her little fat feet on the floor on whidihe had lain with Frieda, here in the Herrenhof, in thehouse of these gentlemeii, the officials, he could not butsay to himself that if he had met Pepi here instead ofFrieda and supposed her to have some kind of connectionswith the Castle — and probably she too had such con-nections — he would have tried to clutch the secret tohimself with the same embraces by means of which hehad had to do it in Frieda's case. In spite of her childishmind etc. 

P. 131, 1 . 12. 

Now he had nothing to do but wait here. Klamm hadto come past here ; he would perhaps be a little tajjenaback to see K. here, but he would be all the morelikely to listen to him, perhaps even to answer him. 
One needn't take the prohibitions here too seriously. 
This, then, was the point K. had reached. True, he wasonly allowed to enter the tap-room, but nevertheless


THE CASTLE

413
here he was, right in the courtyard, standing only a paceaway from Klamm's sledge, soon to be face to face withhim, and was enjoying his food better than anywhere else. 

Suddenly light came on everj^where, the electric li^htwas burning indoors in the passagfe and on the stairs,outside over all the entrances, and the expanse of snowmade it seem more brilliant still. All this was dis-agreeable to K., he stood there, as ft were exposed, on thespot that had up to now been so peacefully dark, but onthe other hand this seemed to signify that now RIainmwould appear, of course it could have been assumed allalong that he could not grope his way down the stairsin the dark in order to make K.'s task easier. Un-fortunately it was not Klamm who came first, bur thelandlord, followed by the landlady, they came, slightlystooping, out of the depths of the passage, they too couldhave been expected, of course they put in an appearancein order to take leave of such a guest. This, however,made it necessary for K. to withdraw a little into theshadow, so giving up the good view he had had of thestaircase. 

P. 136, 1 . 3. 

K. saw no reason to do that, let them abandon him. 
there almost arose new hope ; the fact that the horseswere being unyoked was, admittedly, a sad sign, but thegate was still there, open, could not be locked, was aperpetual promise and a perpetual expectation. Then heheard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastilyhe *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall,instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. To hisamazement it was the landlady from the Bridge Inn. 
She came down thoughtfully but calmly, regularlylifting her hand from the banisters and putting it down


THE CASTLE

414
again. She said good-evening to him pleasantly whenshe arrived at the bottom ; here on alien territory theold quarrel apparently did not have to be kept up. 

What did K. care for the gentleman I Let him goaway, the faster the better ; it was a victory for K., onlyunfortunately one that could not be exploited, when atthe same time the sledge went away, which he sadlywatched going. If,'^he exclaimed, turning round to thegentleman with sudden resolution, '' if I go away fromhere now, instantly, is the sledge permitted to comeback ? ** While he was saying this K. did not believehe was giving way to a compulsion-— otherwise he wouldnot have done it — but felt as if he were renouncingsomething in favour of a weaker person and as if he wereentitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. 
True, from the gentleman's hectoring answer he did atonce realise in what a state of emotional confusion hemust be, if he believed he was acting of his own freewill ; of his own free will, since he was at this moment,after all, invoking the gentleman's injunction. Thesledge is permitted to come back," the gentleman said," but only if you come along with me instantly, withoutdelay, without making any conditions, without goingback on it. Well, how about it ? I ask for the last time. 
I assure you, it is not really my function to keep orderhere in the courtyard." " I am going," K. said, " butnot with you ; I am going through the gate here " — hepointed to the big gate of the courtyard — " into thestreet I " " Very well," the gentleman said, again with
that tormenting mixture of indulgence and harshpess," then I shall go that way too. But now look sharp."
The gentleman came back to K., they walked side byside across the middle of the courtyard, over the un-trodden snow ; looking back for a moment, the gentleman


THE CASTLE

415

made a sign to the driver, who once more drove up rothe entrance, once more climbed up on to the box, anddoubtless resumed his waiting. But so, to the gentle-man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outsidethe courtyard than he stopped a^ain. “ You are in-sufferably obstinate," the gentleman said. But K., who. 
the further away he was from the sledge, the witness ofhis crime, felt more and more dt ease, more and morefirmly linked with his goal, more nearly the gentleman’sequal, indeed even in a certain sense superior to him,turned right round to face him and said ; “ Is that
true ? Aren't you trying to deceive me ? Insullcrablyobstinate ? I wish for nothing better."
At this moment K. felt a faint tickling at the back ofhis neck, tried to brush off whatever caused it, struckout backwards with his hand, and turned round. Thesledge ! K. must have been still in the courtyard andalready the sledge had driven of], soundless in the deepsnow, without bells, without lights, had now skimmedpast K., and the driver had for fun flicked K. will) thewhip. The horses — noble beasts that he had not beenable to appreciate properly while they stood w-aitmg —were already turning in the direction of the Castle,wheeling sharply, with a great yet easy tightening of alltheir muscles and without slowing up ; no sooner hadone become aware of what was happening than it hadall disappeared in the darkness. 

The gentleman pulled out his watch and said rcproacli-ful^ : " And that makes two hours Klamm has had towait." "On my account?" K. asked "Well, yes,of course," the gentleman said. " You mean he can tendure the sight of me ? " K. asked. " Yes," the gentle-mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. But nowI am going home," he added. " You simply cannot


THE CASTLE

416
imagine how much work I have waiting for me there ;I am, you see, Klamm*s local secretary. Momus is myname. Klamm is a tremendous worker, and those whoare in close contact with him have to emulate him, inaccordance with their powers.'* The gentleman hadbecome very talkative, indeed he would probably haveenjoyed answering all sorts of questions from K., but K. 
remained dumb, he only seemed to be closely scrutinisingtlie secretary's face, as though he were trying to discovera law according to which a face had to be formfcd so thatKlamm could endure it. But he found nothing andturned away, taking no notice of the secretary's farewelland pausing only to watch him elbowing his way intothe courtyard through a cavalcade of people who werecoming out, evidently Klamm's servants. These peoplewere walking in twos, but otherwise without keeping inrank or in step, chatting and now and then putting theirheads together as they passed K. The gate was slowlyclosed after them. K. felt a great need of warmth, oflight, of a friendly word, and probably all this was waitingfor him at the school, but he could not help feeling thathe would not find the way home in his present condition,quite apart from the fact that he was now standing in astreet he did not know. Besides, his goal was notsufficiently alluring ; when he pictured to himself in thefairest colours eveiyThing that he would find on hisarrival home, he realised that to-day it would not sufficehim. Well, he could not stay here, and so he pressedon again. 

P. 148, 1 . 14. 

K. was not afraid of the landlady's threats. The hopeswith which she was trying to ensnare him meant h’tdeto him, but the protocol was now beginning to be alluring


THE CASTLE

417
to him, after all. Yet the protocol was not wiiiioutbigniticance ; not in the sense in which she meant it,hut in a general sense, the landlady was right in sayingthat K. must -not give up anything. That had alwaysbeen K.'s opinion too, whenever he* had not happened tobe weakened by disappointment, as he had been to-dayafter his experience in the afternoon. But now he w'asgradually recovering, the landlady" s attacks were givinghim new strength, for even though she kept on ceaselesslytalking a&out his ignorance and untcachabiliry, the merefact of her agitation proved how important it was 10 herto teach him, him of all people ; and even though shetried to humiliate him by the manner in which sheanswered him, nevertheless, the blind zeal with whichshe did so was evidence of the power that his littlequestions had over her. Was he to give up this inlluencc ?And h s influence on Momus was perhaps still stronger ;true, 'Moinus talked little, and when he did talk, heliked to shout, but was this taciturnity nor caution,did he not wish, say, to be sparing w'ith his auihoiity,was it not for this purpose that he had brought thelandlady with him, the lady who, since she liad noofficial responsibility to bear, was not tied, and, heiattitude being conditioned only by whatever K. s atiitudihappened to be, would try, now with sweet, now withbitter, words to lure him into the snares of the recordAnd what were the facts of the situation where thisprotocol was concerned ? Certainly it did not extend asfor as Klamm, but was there no work for K. beforeKhftnm, on the way to Klamm ? Was nor precisely thisafeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed hecould, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the darkwas after all seriously underestimating the distancesepaftting him from Klamm 7 If it was at all possible to
14


THE CASTLE

418
reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl);on this way there were also to be found, for instance,Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two,after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. 
from Klamm ? First the landlady, who had annooincedK/s arrival, and then Momus, who had looked out ofthe window to make sure it was K. coming and who hadinstantly issued the necessary orders so that even the driverwas informed that the departure could not take placebefore K. had gone and who had therefore, at ‘‘that timeincomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that tojudge by all appearances it might yet be a very long timebefore K. went away. In this way, then, everything hadbeen arranged, although, as the landlady had almost hadto admit, it was not Klamm*s sensitiveness, about whiclipeople enjoyed spreading stories, that could be anobstacle to K.^s being admitted to his presence. Whoknows what would have happened if the landlady andMomus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had notdared to show that antagonism ? It was possible andprobable that even then K. would not have got to Klamm,new obstacles would have appeared, there was perhaps aninexliaustible supply of them, but K. would have had thesatisfaction of having organised everything properly tothe best of his knowledge, whereas to-day he should havebeen on his guard against the landlady's interference andyet had done nothing to protect himself from it. But K. 
only knew of the mistakes he had made ,* how theymight have been avoided he did not know. His firstintention, when confronted with Klamm's letter, that ofbecoming an ordinary, unnoticed workman in the village,had been very sensible. But he had necessarily had toabandon it when Barnabas’s deceptive appearance «hadcaused him to believe he could get into the Casfle as


THE CASTLE

419
easily as one can get to the top of a hill, say, on a hirlcSunday walk, more indeed, that he was positively beingencouraged to do so by the smile, by the look in the eyes,of that messenger. And then immediately, before therewas any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with herthe belief, which it was impossible to give up entirelyeven to-day, that through her , mediation an almoMphysical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so closethat it |imounted almost to a whispering form ofcommunication, had come about, of which for the presentonly K. knew, which however needed only a littleintervention, a word, a glance, in order to reveal itselfprimarily to Klamm, but then too to everyone, as some-thing admittedly incredible which was nevcrtlielcss. 
through the compulsion of life, the conijnilsion of theloving embrace, a matter of course. Well, it had notbeen so simple and, instead of temporarily contenrinv»himself with being a workman, K. had for a long ninebeen groping about and was still groping about, ufi-paricntly and vainly, for Klamm. But nevertheless,almost without his doing anything about it, otherpossibilities had presented themselves : at home thesmall position as janitor of the school — pcrhajvs it wasnot the right job, regarded in the light of K.'s own wislies,being too closely modelled on K.'s particular circum-stances, too striking, too provisional, too much dependenton the graciousness of many superiors, ahovc ail on thatof the teacher, but it was nevertheless a solid start mg-poyit, and, besides, the deficiencies of the position werebeiog much improved through the imminent maniage,which K. had hitherto scarcely couched on in his thoughts,but the whole importance of which now' becameSLirpiTisingly clear to him for the first time. Wliat, afterall, was he without Frieda ? A nonentity, staggerirtg


THE CASTLE

420
along after silkily shining will-o'-the-wisps of the sortthat Barnabas was, or that girl from the Castle. WithFrieda's love, admittedly, he was still not conqueringKlamm as by a coup-de-tnain, only in a state of delusionhad he believed that or almost known it, and even thoughthese expectations were still present, as though norefutation by facts could make any difference to them,nevertheless he no longer meant to count on them in hisplans. Nor did he need them any more ; by themarriage he was gaining another, better kind of security —member of the community — rights and duties — no longera stranger — , then he only needed to beware of thecomplacency of all these people, an easy matter with theCastle before his eyes. What was more difficult wasknuckling under, humble work among humble people ;he wanted to begin by submitting to the taking of thestatement. Then he changed the subject, perhaps hecould get at the truth from another side ; as though therehad not yet been any difference of opinion, he askedcalmly : All that has been written about the after-
noon ? All these papers are concerned with that ? "" All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though hehad been waiting for this question, "it is my work."If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, soto speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* butif one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everythinginstantly slips away into darkness. " Couldn't I have alook into them ? " K. asked. Momus began leafingthrough the papers as if he were looking to see whetherthere was anything that could be shown to K., theffhesaid : " No, I'm afraid it's not possible." " fhe
impression this makes on me," K. said, " is that theremust be things there that I could refute." " Tly’ngsyou could make great endeavours to refute," Momus


THE CASTLE

421
said. ** Yes, there are such things there.** And he rookup a blue pencil and, smiling, heavily underlined severallines. ** I am not curious,’* K. said. “ Just go onunderlining things, Mr. Secretary ^ as long as you like. 
No matter what hideous things you have written downabout me, at your leisure, all unchecked. What is filedin the records does not bother mij. I was only thinkingthat there might be a number of things there thatwould be instructive for me, which would show me howan experienced official of long standing arrives at acritical view of me, honestly and in detail. Thar issomething I should have liked to read, for I always liketo learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not likecausing annoyance.” ” And I like playing the innocent,”the landlady said. You just do what tlic Secretarytells you and your wishes will be partly granted. IVointhe questions you will at least indirectly learn somethingof what is in the protocol and through your answers youwill be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.””I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,” K. said,” to be able to believe that he would reveal 10 me againsthis will, through his questions, whatever he has oncedecided to conceal from me. Besides, I have no desireto provide a certain, even though pcrliaps only formal,substantiation of points that are perhaps iiuomct,accusing me incorrectly, by answering at all and allowingmy answers to be incorporated into the hostile tex't. 

Momus glanced up reflectively at the . 

” Well then, let’s pack up our papers,” he said. Wehave delayed long enough, the Land Surveyor cannotcomplain of our being impatient. What w'as it t u aiuSurveyor said? ‘I have too much respect for theSe«*etary, and so on.’ So the excessively great respect thathe has for me renders him speechless. C.ould I diminish


THE CASTLE

422
it, I should get the answers. Unfortunately, however, 1must increase it by confessing that these files do notrequire his answers, since they are not in need either ofsupplementation or of emendation, but that he himselfis very much in need of the protocol, and indeed both ofthe questions and of the answers and that if I tried topersuade him to give h^s answers this was only in his owninterest. Now, however, when I leave this room, theprotocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will neverbe opened before him again.*' The landlady noddedslowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I wasonly permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint atit, but you did not understand me. There in the courtyardyou waited in vain for Klamm, and here in the protocolyou have made Klamm wait in vain. How muddled,how muddled you are I " The landlady had tears in hereyes. Well," K. said, influenced above all by thesetears, " for the moment, after all, the Secretary is stillhere, and so is the protocol." " But I am going now," thesecretary said, stuffing the papers into the brief-case andstanding up. " Are you going to answer now, at last,Land Surveyor ? " the landlady asked. " Too late," thesecretary said, " it's high time for Pepi to open the gate,it’s long past the hour for the servants." For a long timenow there had been a knocking at the gate, Pepi wasstanding there with her hand on tlie bolt, waiting onlyfor the end of the interview with K., in order then toopen it immeciiately. " All right, open the gate, mydear ! " the secretary said, and through the gate therecame pushing, and elbowing each other aside, men of thesort K. already knew, in their earth-coloured uniform. 
They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait forso long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhrsecrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)’


THE CASTLE

42 J
customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that thesecretary already had the papers in the brief-case underhis arm, for the little table was knocked over themoment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet beenstood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it,solemnly, as though it must be" like this. Only thesecretary's beer-glass had instantjj^ been saved, one ofthem had appropriated it, with a jubilant, gurgling cry,and had Jiurried with it to Pepi, who, hov^■e^'er^ hadalready quite vanished in the cro\Nd of men. All thatcould be seen was how around Pepi upstrerched arms wi repointing at the clock on the wall, ir was being convevedto her what a great wrong she had done these people byopening so late. But although she was nor to blame forthe delay, for which actually K. vas to blame, eventhough not of his own will, Pepi did nor seem to becapable of justif)'ing herself to them, ir was reallvdifficult for one of her youth and inexperience to copeV irh these people in a more or less rational way. I lowf'rieda, in Pepi’s place, would have lashed out and shakenthem all off ! But Pepi did not emerge from among themat all ; this, however, did not exactly suit the people,vho above all wanted to be served with beer. But theciowd could not control itself and deynned itself of thevery pleasure for which all of them were so greedy. 
Always the throng, heaving this way and that, keptpushing the slight girl about with it, and though IVpiiu'ld out bravely, in that she did nor scream, there wasnot]nng to be seen or heard of her. And always morepeople kept coming in through the gate ol the courtyard,the room was now packed, the secretary^ could not goaway, he could not get either to the door into the hallor the door into the courtyard, the three of themstood jammed up close together, the landlady holding rhfe


THE CASTLE

424
secretary's arm, K. opposite them and pressed up againstthe secretary in such a way that their faces were almosttouching. But neither the secretary nor the landladywas surprised or annoyed about the crowd, they acceptedit like an ordinary natural phenomenon, trying only toguard themselves from being pushed about all tooviolently, leaning bacl(. into the crowd or yielding to thecurrent when need be, bowing their heads when it wasnecessary in order to escape from the puffing an^ blowingof the men who were all the time discontentedly surgingabout, but apart from that they looked calm and a littleabstracted. Being as near as he now was to the secretaryand the landlady and being allied with them, in onegroup, over against the other people in the room, eventhough they did not seem to acknowledge this, K.'s wholerelation to them in his own mind was changed, all theofficial, the personal element, the element of socialdistinctions, between them, seemed to him to beremoved or at least for the present suspended. Norcould the protocol now be in any way out of K.'s reach. 
"Now you can't get out anyway," K. said to thesecretary. " No, not for the moment," the latter replied. 
" And how about the protocol ? " K. asked. " That staysin the brief-case," Momus said. " I should like to havea bit of a look at it," K. said, involuntarily reaching outfor the case and even getting hold of one end of it. 
" No, no," the secretary said and pulled it away fromhim. " What on earth are you doing ? " the landladysaid and gave K.'s hand a little slap. " You don't thyik,surely, you could get back by force what you have pneelost through frivolity and arrogance? Wicked, dreadfulman ! Do you really suppose the protocol would stillhave any value once it was in your hands ? It woul/^ bea flower plucked in the meadow," " But it woufd be


THE CASTLE

425
destroyed," K. said. " How would it be if now, whenI am no longer allowed to make a voluntary' statement forincorporation in the protocol, I were to set out at least todestroy the protocol ? I have a strong inclination to do so/'and he now resolutely pulled the case from under thesecretary's arm and took possession of it. The sccretarvlet him have it without more ad(>; indeed, he IcK^scncJhis hold so quickly that the case would have fallen to thefloor if had not instantly reached out with his orluThand. " Why only now ? " the secretary asked. “ Youcould have taken it by force at once." " It is force ai^ainscforce," K. said. " You have no justification for nowrefusing me the interrogation you previously ofl'ered, orat least to let me have a look into the papers. I havetaken the case only in order to insist on one or the otlierof these things." " But as a pledge," the secretary saidsmilingly. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs issomething he's pretty good at. You've already provedthat in the files, Mr. Secretary. Couldn't lie be shownjust that one page ? " " Certainly," Momtis said, " nowhe can be shown it." K. held out the case, the landladyrummaged about in it, but evidently could not find thepage. She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion,only that it must be page ten. Now K. looked for it andfound it at once, the landlady took it in order to makesure that it was the right one ; yes, it was the right one. 
She glanced through it once for her own amusement, thesecretary, leaning on her arm, reading at the same time. 
Thgn she handed it to K., who read: "The LandSurveyor K. first of all had to endeavour to establishhimlelf in the village. This was not easy, since no oneneeded his work. Nobody, except the landlord of theBrirjge Inn, whom he had taken unawares, wanted totake' him in, nobody bothered about him— apart froni
14*


THE CASTLE

426
some jokes on the part of the officials. So he roamedabout in a seemingly aimless way, doing nothing butdisturb the peace of the place. In reality however hewas very busy ; he wa^ on the look-out for an opportunityto get a foothold, and soon found one. Frieda, the youngbarmaid in the tap-room at the Herrenhof, believed inhis promises and let h;^t-self be seduced by him. It is noteasy to prove the guilt of Land Surveyor K. The fact isthat one can only sec what tricks he is up to if ^nc forcesoneself, however distressing it may be, to follow histrain of thought exactly. In doing so one must not letoneself be misled if one finds oneself brought face to facewith what looks, on the surface, like a piece of un-believable wickedness, on the contrar)^ if one has reachedthat stage, then one can be sure of not having goneastray, only then has one arrived at the right point. Letus take for instance the case of Frieda. It is clear thatthe Land Surveyor docs nor love Frieda and is notmarrying her for love, lie knows perfectly well that she isa plain, insignificant, over scaring girl, with a disreputablepast into ihe bar^vnin, and he treats her accordingly androams around without bothering about her. That is astatement of the position. This now could be interpretedin various ways, 10 make K. appear a weak or a stupidor a noble or an infamous person. But none of this is infact so. One can arrive at the truth only by exactlyfollowing in his footsteps, which we have traced here,starting with his arrival and continuing up to his affairwith Frieda. Once the hair-raising truth has beendiscovered, it admittedly still remains necessary toaccustom oneself to believing it, but there is no otherchoice. 

“ It was out of calculation of the lowest sort thafr K,attached himself to Frieda, and he will not let her go as


THE CASTLE

4^7
long as he still has any hope at all that his calculationsare correct. The fact is he believed that in her he hadmade the conquest of a mistress of the head of thedepartment, and that he is therefore in possession of apledge for which he can demand the highest p>nce. Hisbolc endeavour now is to negotiate about this price withthe head of the department. Sinc^ he is not in the leastinterested in Frieda, and exclusively interested in theprice, he ^s prepared to make any sort of concessionregard to Frieda herself, whereas he is certain to hestubborn with regard to the price. Though for thepresent he is, apart from the repulsiveness of his assump-tions and his ofl'ers, quite harmless, when he realises howgravely he has been mistaken and how he has exposedhimself he may even become extremely unpleasant, ofcourse within the limits set by his insignificance.”
Here the page ended. The only other tiling uas, inthe margin, a childishly scrawled drawing, a man with agirl in his arms. The giiTs face was buried in the man’schest, but the man, who was much the taller, waslooking over the girFs shoulder at a sheet of paper he liadin his hands and on which lie was joyfully inscribingsome figures. When K. glanced up from this page hewas standing in the middle of the room alone u'lrh thelandlady and the secretary. The landlord had come andhad evidently restored order meanwhile. With lushands raised appeasingly, in his usual urbane manner, hewalked along the walls, where the men had alread\’ settleddo\yn, as well as they could, each of them with his beer,on the barrels or on the floor beside them. Now too ncoura be seen that there were nor so overwlielnunglymany of them as it had at first seemed ; it had onlysedtiied so bad because they had all been scramblingaround Pepi. There w^as a small wild jroiip of mcr


THE CASTLE

428
who had not yet been served still standing round Pepi ;Pepi must have achieved superhuman feats in the mostdifficult circumstances, true, there were still tearscoursing down her cheeks, her beautiful plait had comeundone and was tousled, her dress was actually torn openat the bodice, so that her shift showed, but, unconcernedabout herself, probab^ influenced, too, by the landlord'spresence, she worked away untiringly at the beer-taps. 
At the touching sight of it K. forgave her all fhe annoy-ance she had caused him. “ Yes, the page," he saidthen, put it back into the case and handed the case tothe secretary. " Excuse the hastiness with which I tookthe case from you. It was partly the crowd and also theexcitement that were to blame. Well, I am sure you doexcuse it. Apart from that, both you and the landladyhere have a special capacity for arousing my curiosity, as Imust frankly confess. But the page has disappointedme. It is really a very ordinary meadow- flower, as thelandlady said. Well, regarded as work, it may of coursehave a certain official value, but for me it is merelygossip, trumped-up, empty, sad, womanish gossip, indeed,the writer of it must have had a woman to help him. 
Well, I assume there is at any rate still enough justicehere for me to be able to lodge a complaint about thispiece of handiwork with some department or other, butI shall not do that ; not only because it is too pitiable,but because I am grateful to you. You contrived tomake the protocol seem a little queer to me, but now ithas completely lost its queerness. All that still sti;ikesme as queer is the fact that such things should everhave been meant to be made the basis of an interrogationand that even Klamm's name should have been misusedfor that purpose." " If I were your enemy," the Itfhd-lady said, " I could not have wished for anything better


THE CASTLE

429
than that you should take such a view of this“ Ah yes,’' K. said, you are not my enemy. For mysake you even let Frieda be slandered.” ” You don’treally mean to say you believe that w'jiat it says tlicrc is myopinion of Frieda I ” die landlady exclaimed. ” It'syour own opinion of her. Thar is simply the way yonlook down on the poor child.” Jo this K. made noreply, for this now was nothing but abuse. The sccretaiy'did his b^t to conceal his delight at having the bricFcaserestored to him, but could not do so ; he gazed at thecase, smiling, as though it were not his own but a newone that he had just been presented with and which hecould not gaze his fill of. As though it radiated somespecial, beneficial warmth, he held it clutched to hischest. He even took out the page K. had read, on thepretext of putting it back more tidily, and read it onceagain. Only this reading, during which he hailed eachword with the happy air of one greeting a dear long-lostfriend surprisingly encountered, seemed to assure himthat he had really regained possession of the protocolfor good. He would really have liked to show it to thelandlady too so that she could also read it again. K. leftthe two of them to each other, he scarcely glanced atthem, there was far too great a discrepancy het ween theimportance they had up till now had for him and theirpresent insignificance. How they stood there together,those two collaborators, each helping the other withtheir miserable secrets i
P. 171, 1 . 23. 

*1 know,” Frieda said suddenly, ” it would be belterfor you if I left you. But it would break my heart if Iha<!Fto do it. And yet I would do it, if it were possible,but It is not possible, and I am glad of it, at any rate


THE CASTLE

430
it is not possible here in the village. Just as theassistants can't go away either. It's no use your hopingyou've driven them away for good I " ** Frankly, tliat’s
what I do hope," K.^ said, without taking any notice ofFrieda’s other remarks, some feeling of uncertaintyprevented him from doing so, the weak hands and wristsnow slowly working \^t the coffee-mill seemed to himmore sad than ever. " The assistants aren't coming backany more. And what are these impossibilitjes you'retalking about ? "
Frieda had stopped working. She looked at K. with agaze blurred by tears. " Dearest," she said, " understandme rightly. It is not I who have ordained all thesethings, 1 am explaining it to you only because you insistand because in this way too I can justify a number ofthings about my own behaviour that you cannot otherwiseunderstand and cannot reconcile w'ith my love for you. 
As a stranger you have no right to anything here, perhapshere we are particularly strict or unjust towards strangcis,1 don’t know, but there it is, you have no riglit u>anything. A local person, for instance, when he need.sassistants, takes such people on, and when he is grownup and wants to marry, he takes himself a wife. Theauthorities have a great deal of influence in these matterstoo, but in the main everyone is free to decide for himseli. 
But you, as a stranger, have to make do with what youarc given ; if it pleases the authoiitics to do so, theygive you assistants, if it pleases tlicm to do so, tliey giveyou a wife. Even this, of course, is not mercl)’ arbitrary,but It is a matter solely for the authorities to decide, andthis means that the reasons for the decision remainhidden. Now you can perhaps refuse \\'hat you aicgiven, I don’t know for sure, perhaps \'ou can rchf^e . 
but if you have once accepted it, then upon it anJ


THE CASTLE

consequently upon you too there weighs the pressure ofthe authorities ; only if the authorities so \s’ill can it betaken from you again, and in no other manner. So Ihave been told by the landlady, from whom I have allthis, :she said she must open my eyes for me about variousthings before I marry. And she particularly emphasisedthe fact that everyone who knows about such thingsadvises the stranger to put up with such presents oncethey have been accepted, since one can never succeed inshaking them off; the only thing one can aclueve, shesaid, is to turn the things given, which at the very woist dostill have a trace of friendliness about them, into hfe-longenemies that can never be shaken ofl. Tliat is what thelandlady told me, I am only repeating what she said; thelandlady knows everj’thing, and she must be believed."
" Some things she says can be believed," K. said. 

P. 175, 1 . 20. 

" It isn't the cat that frightens me, but m)- badconscience. And if the cat drops on me, J feel as ilsomeone had poked me in the chest, ns a sign that I'vebeen seen through." Frieda let go of the curLam, shutthe inner window, and pleadingly drew R. 10 wards thesack of straw. " And it isn't the cat 1 go looking for thenuith the candle, but it's you I want to wake quickly. 
That's how it is, darling, darling." " They are mes-sengers of Klamm’s," K. said, drawing I-rieda closer toliim and kissing her on the nape of her neck, so that atremor ran through her and she leapt up, throwinghci'self on him, and both then slid ro the floor amifun^bled at each other hastily, breathlessly, anxiously, asthough each w'ere trjung to hide in the other, as thoughtl^' pleasure they were experiencing belonged to sonutiurd person whom they were depiiNing of ir. Shall i


THE CASTLE

432
open the door ? K, asked. “ Will you run to them ?
No ! " Frieda screamed, clutching his arm. ‘‘ I don'twant to go to them, I want to stay with you. Protectme, keep me with you.'* But,'' K. said, ** if they aremessengers of Klamm's, as you say they are, whar helpcan doors be, what help can my protection be, and if theycould be of help, woul^such help really be a good thing ? "
I don't know who they are," Frieda said. " I callthem messengers because after all Klamm is yoursuperior and the department sent the assistants* to you ;that’s all I know, nothing else. Dearest, take them backagain, don't sin against him who perhaps sent them."K. freed himself from Frieda's grip and said : " Theassistants are going to stay outside, I don't want them inmy proximity any more. What ? You suggest thosetwo have the capacity to lead me to Klamm ? I doubtthat. And if they could, I should not have the capacityto follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximitywould rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. 
They confuse me and, as I now discover, you too,unfortunately. I have given you the choice betweenmyself and them, you have chosen me, now leaveeverything else to me. This very day I hope to receivedecisive news. They began it all by drawing you awayfrom me, whether guiltily or innocently makes no differ-ence to me. Do you really think, Frieda, I should haveopened the door for you, making the way free for you ? "
P. 202, 1 . 7. 

Incidentally, it had looked as though the work were apleasure to Frieda, as though she especially enjoyed tfinysort of dirty and strenuous work, any work that taxedher strength to the utmost, keeping her from thinkingand dreaming. ^


THE CASTLE

4M
P. 202, 1.51 (immediately after passage now first printed,pp. 40 Z- 4 ). 

Now the candles were extinguished indoors, and at thesame instant Gisa appeared at the front door ; evidentlyshe had left the room while there was still light there,for she attached much importance to respectability. 
Schwarzer soon followed, and noV they set out on theirway, which to their pleased surprise was clear of snow. 
When they reached K., Schwarzer slapped him on theback. If you keep things tidy in the house here,’' hesaid, ‘‘ you can count on me. But I have heard gravecomplaints about you, on account of your behaviour thismorning.” ” He’s improving,” Gisa said, withouti^lancing at K. or stopping at all. ” I must say, thefellow certainly needs to.” Schwarzer said and hurriedon in order not to lose contact with Gisa. 

P. 224. 1 . 30. 

” Now I don't understand you, Olga,” K. said. ” Ionly know that 1 envy Barnabas for all these tilings tliaistrike you as so terrible. I admit it would be better stillif everything he has were established beyond doubt,but even if he is in the most worthless of all the ante-chambers of the offices, still, he is at least there in thatante-chamber ; how far beneath him he has left, forinstance, the chimney-corner in which we are sitting. Itsurprises me that though you can pretend to appreciatethis, in order to comfort Barnabas, you don t really seemto understand it in your own mind. At the same time-and this makes it even more difficult for me to undcr-st;|nd you — you seem to be the one who spurs Barnabason in all his endeavours, something, by the way, that Ishould never even have dreamt of supposing after thatfirst evening when we met.” You misjudge me, O ga


THE CASTLE

434
said, *' I don^t do any spurring, oh no ; if what Barnabasdocs were not necessary I should be the first who wouldtry to hold him back and keep him here always. Forisn't It time for him to marry and set up house forliiinsclf ? And instead of that he is frittering his powersaway between his handicraft and being a messenger,standing in front of th^ desk up there, on the look-outfor a glance from the official who looks like Klamm, andin the end gets an old dusty letter that is no good toanyone and only causes confusion in the world." " Butthat is yet another and quite different question," K. said. 
" The fact that the errands on which Barnabas is sentarc worthless or harmful may be grounds for a chargeagainst the department and may, furthermore, be a verybad thing for those to whom such messages are sent, as,lor instance, for me, but after all it does no harm toBarnabas, he merely carries the messages to and froaccording to orders, often not even knowing what is inthem, himself remaining beyond reproach as an officialmessenger, just as it is the wish of you all." " Well,yes," Olga said, " perhaps it is like that. Sometimeswhen I sit here alone — Barnabas at the Castle, Amalia inthe kitchen, our poor parents dozing over there, I take upBarnabas’s cobbling work and set about it with mvextremely inexpert hands, then I lay it down again andbegin thinking, helpless, because I am alone and I amvery far from having the understanding to cope with thesethings — then everything merges with everything else mmy mind, not even the fear and the worries remaindistinct." " And why then do they despise you all ?*"K. asked and remembered the ugly impression tl^isstocky, broad-backed family had made on him the ven^first evening, all gathered round the table by the light ofthe little oil-lamp, one back beside the other and the t'*\o


THE CASTLE

4^5
old people with their little heads almost drooping intothe soup, waiting to be fed. How revolting all that hadbeen, and all the more revolting because this impressioncould not be explained by derails^, for though one listedthe details in order to have something to hold on to, theywere not bad, it was something else about it all that onecould not put a name to. Only^^rrer K. had discoveredvarious things here in the village that had made himcautious about first impressions, and not only about firstimpressions either, but about second and even laterimpressions, and only after the entity this family was hadior liim dissolved into separate persons whom he couldpartially understand but with whom, above all, he couldled, as with friends, such as he had orheruise not foundanywhere here in this village- -only now did that oldrevulsion begin to fade, but it had not yet completelygone. The parents in their corner, the little oil-lamp,the room itself — it was not easy to endure all this calmly,.md one needed to get some gift in return, such as Olga’sStorys was, in order to reconcile oneself to it a little, andthen only seemingly and only provisionally. Andthinking of this he added : “I am now convinced thatyou are all being done an injustice, I may as well say thatat once. But, though I don’t know the reason, it must bedifficult not to do you an injustice. One must be astranger in my special situation in order to remain free ofthis prejudice. And I myself was for a long time in-fluenced by it, so much influenced by it that the moodf'revailing where you are concerned — it is not onlycontempt, there is fear mixed with it too — seemed amatter of course to me, I did not think about it, I didnot enquire into the causes, I did not in the least try todefend you all, indeed the whole thing had nothing to dowirti me. Now however I see it quite differently. Now


THE CASTLE

436
I believe tliat the people who despise you arc not merelyhushing up the causes* but really do not know themone has to get to know you all* particularly you* Olga*in order to free oneself from the prevailing delusion. 
What is held against you is obviously nothing but thefact that you are aiming higher than others ; the factthat Barnabas has beco'h^e a Castle messenger* or is tryingto become one* is something for which people bear you agrudge ; in order to avoid having to admire you, theydespise you, and they do it with such intensity that evenyou yourselves are defeated by it. For what else areyour worries, your timidity, your doubts, but theconsequence of that universal contempt ? " Olga smiled,and she gazed at K. in a way that was so shrewd andbright-eyed that he was almost disconcerted, it was aschough he had said something wildly mistaken and asthough Olga must now begin arguing with him andclearing up the mistakes and as though she were veryhappy about this task. And the question why everyonewas against this family seemed to K. to be again unsolvedand to be very much in need of a clear answer. “ No,"Olga said, " that is not the way it is, our situation is notso favourable, you arc trying to make up for havinghitherto not defended us against Frieda and now you aredefending us far too much. We do not aim higher thanthe rest. Do you think that wanting to be a Castlemessenger is a high aim ? Anyone who can run aboutand memorise a few words of a message has the capacityCO become a Castle messenger. Nor is it a paid job. 
The request to be taken on as a Castle messenger seemsto be regarded much like the begging of little childKbnwho have nothing to do* who pester the grown-ups togive them some errand or other, to let them do some jobor other, everything only for the honour of it and for ehc


THE CASTLE

437
sake of the job itself. So it is here too, only with thedifference that there are not many who push themselvesforward and that he who is really or apparently taken onis not treated kindly, as a child would be, but is tomiented. 
No, for that, you see, nobody envies us, people are rathermore inclined to pity us because of it, for in spite of allhostility there is still a spark of /ity to be found hereand there. Perhaps in your heart too — for what elsecould draw you to us ? Solely Barnabas’s messages ? Ican’t believe that. I don’t suppose you have ever reallyattached much importance to them, you have insisted onthem merely out of pity for Barnabas or at least to a\’ery great extent for that reason. And you have not beenunsuccessful in this aim. True, Barnabas stiHers as aresult of your sublime, unfulfillablc demands, but at rhesame time they give him a little pride, a little coniidencc,the continual doubts from which he cannot free himselfup there in the Castle arc to some slight extent refutedby your trust, by your continual sympathy. Since youhave been in the village things go better with him. Andsomething of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ;It would be even more if you came to see us more often. 
You hold back, on Frieda’s account, J can understandihat, I said as much to Amalia. But Amalia is so restless,for some time now I have sometimes hardly dared to talkto her even about the most necessary things. She doesn teven seem to listen when one speaks to her, and if shedoes listen she does not seem to understand what is saidto her, and if she does understand it, she seems to despiseIt.* But all this, after all, she does not do on purpose, andonj must not be cross with her ; the more aloof she is,the more gently one must treat her. She is as weak asshe seems to be strong. Yesterday for instance Barnabassaid chat you would be coming co-day ; knowing Amalia


THE CASTLE

438
2Lb he does he added, as a precaution, that it was only ipossibility that you would come, it was not yet definite. 
But nevertheless Amalia was waiting for you all day,incapable of doing anything else, and only in the eveningshe could nor keep on' her feet any longer and had to liedown/* “ Now I understand,** K. said, ** why I meansomething to you all>,^ctually without any merit of myown. We are tied to each other, just as the messengeris to him to whom the message is addressed, but no morethan iliar, you people must not exaggerate ; I aftach toonuicli importance to your friendship, especially to yours,Olga, to tolerate its being endangered by exaggeratedexpectations ; I mean in the way that you were all almostestranged from me through the fact that I hoped for toomuch from you. If a game is being played with you, it isnot less so with me, tlien it is simply one single game, agame that is amazingly all of one piece. From the stories)’ou tell me I have even gathered the impression that thetwo messages Barnabas brought me are the only oneswith whicli lie has been entrusted up to now.** Olganodded. ** I was ashamed to confess it,** she said withlowered eyes, “ or I was afraid that then the messageswould seem to you even more w'orthless than before.’*Bur you two,” K. said, you and Amalia, are alwaysdoing your utmost to make me have less and less con-fidence in the messages,** Yes,** Olga said, “ Amaliadoes so, and I imitate her. It is this hopelessness thathas us all in its grip. We believe the worthlessness of themessage is so obvious that w^e cannot spoil anything bypointing out w^hat is so obvious, that, on the contrary,we shall gain more trust and mercy from your sij^e,which IS in fact the only thing for which, at bottom, w'ehope. Do you understand me ? That is the w^ay ourminds work. The messages are worthless, there isi no


THE CASTLE

4^0

Strength to be gained from them directly, you are tooshrewd to let yourself be deceived in this respect, andeven if we could deceive you, Barnabas would be onlv afalse messenger, and from falsehoods no salvation couldcome/* And so you are nor frank with me/* K. said,not even you are frank with me/* “You still don’tunderstand our extremity,** Olg/said and gazed at K. 
anxiously, ** it is probably our fault, being unaccustomedto associating with people, we perhaps repel you, preciselythrough our desperate attempts to attract you. 1 am notfrank, you say? Nobody can be more frank than J amtowards you. If I keep ant thing from you, it is onlyfrom fear of you, and this fear is something I do nothide from you, but show quire openly. Take this learfrom me and you have me urieily and completely. 

“ What fear do you mean ? “ K. asked. ** The lear oflosing you,** Olga said, *' just rcllecr, for three ye.irsBarnabas has been fighting for his appointment, forthree years we have been waiting and watching lor somesuccess in his endeavours, all in vain, not the slightestsuccess, only disgrace, torment, time v^'as^ed, threats as tothe future, and then one evening he comes with a letter,a letter to you. * A Land Surveyor has arrived, he set msto have come for our sake. I am to carry all com-munications between him and the Castle, Bainahassaid. * There seem to be important things involved, hesaid. * Of course,* I said, * a Land Surveyor ! I le willcarry out many jobs, many messages w'lH have to heearned to and fro. Now you are a real messenger, soonyou will be given the oHici.d unilorm.’ ‘ It is possib c. 
Barnabas said ; even he, this hoy who has become such aself-tormentor, said : * It is possible.’ That evening we'^vvere happy, even Amalia shared in it, in icr owntrie, she didn't listen to us, but she pulled her stool, on


THE CASTLE

440
which she sat knitting, nearer to us and sometimes glancedover at us, as we sat laughing and whispering. Ourhappiness did not last long, it came to an end that sameevening. Admittedly, ^ it even seemed to increase whenBarnabas unexpectedly came with you. But even then thedoubts began, it was an honour for us, of course, that youhad come, but from ^he very beginning it was alsodisturbing. What did you want, we wondered. Whydid you come ? Were you really the great man foj* whomwe had taken you, if you cared to come into our poorparlour ? Why did you not stay in your own place,waiting for the messenger to come up to you, as itbecame your dignity, sending him away instantly ? Didyou not take away something of the importance ofBarnabas’s appointment as a messenger, by the fact thatyou had come ? Besides, though you were foreign in)^our dress, you were poorly dressed, and sadly I turnedthis way and that the wet coat that I took off you thattime. Was it that we were to have bad luck with thefirst recipient of messages, for whom we had yearned forso long ? Then, admittedly, we could see that you didnot lower yourself to our level, you remained by thewindow, and nothing could bring you to our table. Wedid not turn round towards you, but we thought ofnothing else. Had you come only to test us ? To seefrom what sort of family your messenger came ? Hadyou suspicions of us even on the second evening afteryour arrival } And was the result of the test unfavourablefor us, that you remained so taciturn, spoke no wordus, and w'ere in a hurry to get away from us again ?Your going away was for us a proof that you despistfdnot only us but, what was much worse, Barnabas’smessages too. We alone were not capable of recognising*their true significance, that could be done only by you,


THE CASTLE

441
wHom tHcy directly concerned and to whose professiontliey referred. And so it was actually you who taught usto doubt , from that evening on Barnabas bc^an to makehis pd observations up there in tlje office. And whateverquestions were left open that evening were linnllyanswered in the morning, when I came out of die stableand watched you moving out the Herrenhof withFrieda and the assistants, realising that you no longerset any. hopes in us andfhad abandoned us. Of courseI did not say anything to Barnabas about it, he isheavily enough burdened with his own worries."'‘‘And am I not here again?*' K. said, “keepingFrieda waiting and listening to stories about yourmisery as though it were my own? *' “ Yes, you archere,** Olga said, “ and we arc glad of it. The hope thatyou brought us was beginning to grow fainter ; we werealready greatly in need of your coming again." “ hor metoo," K. said, ** it was necessary to conic, I see that."
P. 228, 1 . 4. 

“ And Amalia, of course, did not interfere at all,although according to your hints she knows more .ibourthe Castle than you do ; well, perhaps she is most toblame for everything." “ You have an amazing gIMs]^ ofthe whole situation,** Olga said, “ sometimes you helpme with one word, probably it is because you come fromabroad. We, on the other hand, with our sad experiencesand fears, can't help being frightened by every creak oftbc floorboards, without being able to help ourselves,and if one takes fright, the next one instantly takes frighttoo and even without knowing the proper reason for it. 
In such a manner one can never arrive at a proper"judgment. Even if one had once had the ability to thinkeverything out — and we women have never had k one


THE CASTLE

442
would lose it under these conditions. What good luckit is for us that you have come.** It was the first timethat K. heard sucli an unreserved welcome here in thevillage, but however ipuch he had felt the want of ithitherto and however trustworthy Olga seemed to him,he did not like hearing it. He had not come to bringluck to anyone ; he wai at liberty to help of his own freewill, if things turned out that way, but nobody was tohail him as a bringer of luck, fanyone who did tjiat wasconfusing his paths, claiming him for matters for whichhe, being thus compelled, was never at their disposal,with the greatest good will on his part he could not dothat. Yet Olga repaired her blunder when she con-tinued : “ However, whenever I think I could cast asideall my worries, for you w'ould find the explanation foreverything and the way out, you suddenly say somethingentirely, something painfully, wrong, such as for instancethis ; that Amalia knows more than anyone else, doesnot interfere and is most to blame. No, K., we cannever get near to Amalia, and least of all by means ofreproaches I What helps you to judge everything else,your friendliness and your courage, makes it impossiblefor you to form a judgment about Amalia. Before wecould dare to reproach her we should first of all have tohave an inkling of how she suflers. Just lately she hasbeen so restless, has been concealing so much — and atbottom I am sure concealing nothing but her ownsuffering — that I scarcely dare to talk to her even aboutw'hat is most necessary. When I came in and saw you ^nquiet conversation with her, I was startled ; in realityone cannot talk to her now, then again times come wfi^nshe is quieter, or perhaps not quieter but only moretired, but now it is once again at its worst. She doesn*teven seem to listen when one speaks to her, and if ‘she


THn CASTLE

44 ^
does listen she does not seem to understand what is saidto her, and if she does understand it, sly: seems to despiseIt. But all this, after all, she does not do on purpose,and one must not be a'oss with hy ; the more aloof sheIS, the more gently one must treat her. She is as weakas she seems to be strong. Yesterday, for instance. 
Barnabas said that you would- be coming to-day ;knowing Amalia as he docs he added, as a precaution,that it \vas only a possibility that you would come, it wasnot yet definite. But, nevertheless, Amalia was waiiini^for you all day, incapable of doing anything else, andonly in the evening she could not keep on her feet anylonger and had to he down.” Again what K. heard inall this was above all the demands that tins family wasmaking on him. One could easily go completely wrongabout this family if one was nor careful. He was onlyvery sorry that he should be having such impossibleideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing theintimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich wasvery comforting to him, which wms primarily what kepthim here and for the sake of which lie would have likedbest to put off his departure indefinitely. “We shallfind it difficult to agree,” K. said, “ I see that already. 
As yet we have hardly touched on what really mattersand even now there are contradictions here and ilicre. 
If the two of us were alone, it would not be di/hculfto agree, I should soon be of one mind v\'ith you, )'ou areunselfish and intelligent ; only W'c are nor alone ; indeedwe, are not even the main persons, your family is there,about which we shall scarcely manage to agree, andab<|ut Amalia we shall certainly not.” “ You condemn•‘^malia entirely?” Olga asked. “Without knowingner, you condemn her ? ” “ I do not condemn her, k. 

said, “ nor am I blind to her merits, I even admit that


THE CASTLE

444
I may be doing her injustice, but it is very difficult notto do her injustice, for she is haughty and reserved anddomineering into the bargain ; if she were not also sadand obviously unhappy, one could not reconcile onselfto her at all/* ** Is that all you have against her ? ”Olga asked, and now she herself had become sad. ** Isuppose it*s enough, XK. said and saw only now thatAmalia was back in the room again, but far away fromthem, at the parents’ table, ft*' There she is,”^K. said,and against his will there was in his tone the abhorrenceof that supper and all who were partaking of it. Youare prejudiced against Amalia,” Olga said. ” I am,” K. 
said. ” Why am I ? Tell me, if you know. You arefrank, I appreciate that very much, but you are frankonly where you yourself are concerned, you believe youhave to protect your brother and sister by keepingsilence. That is wrong, I can’t support Barnabas if Idon’t know everything that concerns him and, sinceAmalia is involved in everything to do with your family,everything that concerns Amalia too. Surely you don’twant me to undertake something and, as a consequence ofinsufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances andfor that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage youand myself in a way that is beyond repair.” ” No, K.,”Olga said after a pause, ” I don’t want that and there-fore it would be better if everything could be left as itwas,” ” I don’t think,” K. said, ” that that is better,I don’t think that it is better for Barnabas to go onleading this shadowy existence as an alleged messengerand for you all to share this life with him, grown-uppeople feeding on baby-food, I don’t think that thaii isbetter than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets methink out the best ways and means here at my leisure,and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf,


THE CASTLE

445
under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself,arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlierinto the bureaux or perhaps docs not make anybut learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^in the room where he already is. I don't think that ihaiwould be bad and not worth a g(id deal of sacrifice. 
Yet it is, of course, also possible^hat I am wrong andthat precisely what you are keeping back is what" putsyou in tjie right. Then shall remain good friends inspite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihoutyour friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lospend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting,only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot bepostponed, could have justified that." K. was about toget up, Olga kept him back. " Did bVicda tell youanything about us? " she asked. " Nothing definite."" Nor the landlady? " " No, nothing." “ I'hai was
what I expected," Olga said, " you won't learn anythingdefinite about us from anyone in the village, on the otherhand, everyone — w'hether he knows what it is all aboutor whether he knows nothing and only believes rumoursgoing around or invented by himself — everyone willsomehow try to show in a general way that he despisesus, obviously he would have to despise himself li he dulnot do so. That is how it is with Frieda and witheveryone, but this contempt is only generally and broadlydirected against us, against the family, and the barb isaimed only at Amalia. Especially for this reason too 1 amgrateful to you, K., for despising neither us nor Amnlia,although you are under the general influence. Only \ouare jprejud iced, at least against Barnabas and Amalia, thefact is nobody can completely escape the influence of thev?brld ; but that you are capable of it to sucii an extentis a ^reat deal, and my hope is to a large extent based on


THE CASTLE

446
this." " I am not interested in other people's opinions,"K. said, " and 1 am not curious to know their reasons. 
Perhaps — it would be a bad thing, but it is possible —perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when Imarry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I amfree, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thij» visit of mineto you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but Iam still free, I can still, if something seems to me asimportant as Barnabas’s affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it asexhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. Now,however, you will understand why I urge a very quickdecision : I am still with you, but only, as it were, tillfurther nonce, at any moment someone may come andletch me, and then I don’t know when I shall be ableto come again." " But Barnabas isn’t here," Olga said," what can be decided without him ? " "I don’t needliim for the time being," K. said, for the time being1 need other things. But before I go into that I beg you,don’t let yourself be deceived if what I say soundsdomineering, 1 am no more domineering than I aminquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or torob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the wayI should like to be treated myself." " How like astranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you weremuch nearer to us before, were you not ? Your reserva-tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted)'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regardto me either.” " If I speak diflerently from before,"K. said, " that is because I want to be even nearer toyou all than before, I want to be at home among you,cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | notat all, either we shall make entirely common cause,with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefytlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld


THE CASTLE

447
compromise me and perhaps all of you too. To tinsalliance, as I wish it to be, this alhanct' ^^■Kh the Casrlc^ in mind, there exists, admittedly, one' grave obstacle :Amalia. And that is why I ask' you first of all : Canyou speak for Amalia, ansvv'cr for hc^ vouch for her : "
I can partly speak for her, partly answer for her, Imr Icannot vouch for her.*' “ Wo«^t you call her?'’“ That would be the end. You would learn less fio;nher than from me. She w(;uld reject any sort of allianceand would not tolerate any condition, she would f>ibKleven me to answer ; with a skill and ine.vorabihrv that \ o[\still have no idea that she possesses, she w'ould foice \outo break off the discussions and to go and then, then, to i)*'sure, when you were outside, she would perhaps collapsein a faint. That is what she is like.” “ But w ithnut tiereverything is hopeless,” K. said. ” without her w’e leniainhnlf-w'ay, in uncertainty.” ” Perhaps,” Olga said, ” \ouwill now be able to estimate Barnabas’s work bettor alterall, we two, he and I, work alone; wttliont Amalia it isas if we w'ere building a house w iilHuit foundartons.”
P. 253, 1. 5. 

Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed onaccount of the allair wurli the letter?” K. asKed. 

Because he completely disappeaied ? ” asl.ed. 

” On the contrary. This complete disapjHarance is areward that the officials allegedly do their utmost to get ;after all, dealing with applicants is what is so tormentingfor them.” ” But Sortini had scarcely had any of thatsort of work even previously,” K. said. Or was thatlettjr perhaps also part of that dealing with applicants^\yhich so tormented him ? ” ** Please, K., don t asK in
^h’at manner,” Olga said. ** Since Amalia has beenhere,* you have been difTercnt. What good can such


THE CASTLE

448
questions Whether you ask them seriously or
jokingly, no on^ can answer them. They remind me ofAmalia at the beginning of these years of misfortune.. 
She hardly talked at all, but paid attention to everythingthat happened, she was much more attentive than she isnow, and sometinks she would break her silence afterall, and then it with some such question, whichperhaps would shame the questioner, at any rate theperson questioned, and mostly certainly Sortini too.**
P. 253, 1 . 30 (continuation of K.*s speech). 

The Castle in itself is infinitely more powerful thanyou are, nevertheless there might still be some doubtwhether it will win, yet you don*t turn that to account,but it is as tliough all your endeavours were aimed atestablishing the victory of the Castle beyond any doubt,that is wliy suddenly in the midst of the fight you beginto be afraid without any cause, thus increasing your ownhelplessness."
P. 3 30, last line but one. (After first sentence of Chapter
XIX.)
Sit down somewhere,** Erlanger said ; he himself satdown at the desk and put some files, which, after afleeting glance at the covers, he first rearranged, into asmall attach6-case, similar to the one Biirgel had, butw'hich turned out to be almost too small for the files. 
Erlanger had to take out the files that he had already putin and try to pack them again differently. " You oughtto have come long ago,** he said ; he had been unfriendlyeven before, but now he was probably transferring hisanno}\ance with the obstinate files to K. K., startledout of his weariness by the new surroundings andErlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtledillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the ‘


THE CASTLE

449
schoolmaster— outwardly, too, there were litric points ofresemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair,4ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and toleft were absent that day — ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' aspossible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcrhad been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturbhim he had gone away, then, of course, passed over insilence what he had been doing in the meantime,resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihsconfusing the doors, and concluded by referring to hisextraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be takeninto consideration. Erlanger at once discovered theweak point in this answer. “ Queer,** he said, “ I sleepin order to be rested for my work, but during the sametime you are roaming about I don't know where, onl)'to make excuses about being tired when the mterrogarionis supposed to begin." K. was about to answer, butErlanger stopped him with a gesture. " Your fatiguedoes not seem to diminish your garrulity," lie said. 

Nor was the muttering going on for hours m the nextroom exactly the best way of sliowing consideration lormy sleep, to which you allegedly attach so much im-portance." Once again K. w'as about to answer, andonce again Erlanger prevented him. " Anyway, I shallnot take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I onlywant to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lieremembered something, it now became apparent that hehad all the time been vaguely thinking of something thatwas distracting him and that the severity with which hehad spoken to K. had perhaps only been superficial andactually produced only by his inattentiveness, and hepressed the button of an electric bell on the desk. 
Through a side-door — so Erlanger and his suite occupiedseveral rooms — a servant instantly appeared. was


THE CASTLE

450
obviously a ^icadle, one of those of whom Olga had toldhim, he him^df had never seen such a person before. 
He was a fairly small but very broad man, liis face wa<k^also broad and open.^and in it the eyes, never wide open,seemed all the imnller. His suit was reminiscent ofKlamm's suit, though it was worn and fitted badly, thiswas particularly striking in the case of the sleeves, whichwere too short, for the servant had fairly short arms tobegin with, the suit had dbviously been nijant for astill smaller man, probably the servants wore theollicials’ cast-off clothing. That might also contributeto the proverbial pride of all the servants ; this one, too,seemed to think that by answering the bell he had doneall the work that could be expected of him, and gazedat K. witii an expression as severe as if he had been sentfor to order K. about. Erlanger, on the other hand,waited in silence for the servant to carry out some job orother, for which he had summoned him, as a customaryone to be done without any further specific order. Sincehowever, this did not happen, the servant only continuingto gaze at K. angrily or reproachfully, Erlanger stampedirritably and almost drove K. — once again K. had tobear the consequences of annoyance for wdiich he wasnot to blame — out of the room, telling him to waitoutside for a moment, he would be let in again instantly. 
When he was then called back in a markedly moreamiable rone, the servant had already gone, the onlychange that K. noticed in the room lay in the fact thatnow a u ooden screen concealed the bed, w'ash-stand,^ andwardrobe. “ One has a great deal of trouble wdth theservants," Erlanger said, and, coming from his lips, ^ thiscould be taken as an astonishingly confidential remark, il^of course, it w^as not merely soliloquy. " And indefcdplenty of trouble and worry on all sides," he conrif.ued


THE CASTLE

451
leaning back in his chair, holding his clenched hsrs taiaway from himself on the table. “ my chief. 

„ has been a little uneasy during the last If w da)'S, at leastit seems so to us who live in his proximity and tty towork but and interpret every one of l^is utterances. Itseems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasy— howshould uneasiness touch him? — but’ we are uneasy, wcround about him are uneasy and can hardly conceal itfrom him any more in our#work. This is, of course, astate of affairs that, if it is not to cause tiie ^leatesidamage — to everyone^ including you — must if possible,not be allowed to last a moment longer I Wc haye be ensearching for the reasons and have discoyeied varunisthings that might possibly be to blame for it. I'hcie areamong them the most ridiculous things, wliicli is noi sovery astonishing, for the extremely ridiculous and theextremely serious are not far removed from each other. 
Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can onlybe done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances arecarefully watched and if possible no change is pei miltedin this respect. The circumstance, for instance, iliat anink-well has been shifted a hand's-breadtli from its usualplace may endanger the most important work. To kce}>a watch over all this should really be the servants’ ]oh,but unfortunately they are so little to be depcnvled onthat a large part of this work has to be done by us, notleast by me, who am reputed to have a particularly shaipeye for these things. Now, as it happens, this is a verydelicate, intimate job that could be done in a twinklingby the insensitive hands of servants, but which causes mea great deal of trouble, is very remote from the rest ofmy w'ork and, by the shifting to and fro that it occasions,might very well completely ruin nerves only a littleweaker than mine are. You understand me ?