I T was late in the evening when K. arrived. The 
village was deep in snow. The Castle hill was 
hidden, veiled in mist afld darkness, nor was there even 
a glimmer of light to show that a castle was there. On 
the wooden bridge leading from the main road to the 
village K. stood for a long time gazing into the illusory 
emptiness above him. 

Then he went on to find quarters for the night. The 
inn was still awake, and although the landlord could 
not provide a room and was upset by such a late and 
unexpected arrival, he was willing to let K. sleep on a 
bag of straw in the parlour. K. accepted the offer. 
Some peasants were still sitting over their beer, but 
he did not want to talk, and after himself fetching the 
bag of straw from the attic, lay down beside the stove. 
It was a warm corner, the peasants were quiet, and 
letting his weary eyes stray over them he soon fell asleep. 

But very shortly he was awakened. A young man 
dressed like a townsman, with the face of an actor, his 
eyes narrow and his eyebrows strongly marked, was 
standing beside him along with the landlord. The 
peasants were still in the room, and a few had turned 
their chairs round so as to see and hear better. The 
young man apologised very courteously for having 
awakened K., introducing himself as the son of the 
Castellan, and then said : “ This village belongs to 
*the Castle, and whoever lives here or passes the night 
Hfere does so in a manner of speaking in the Castle itself. 
Nobody may do that without the Count’s permission. 



12 


THE CASTLE 


But you have no such permit, or at least you have 
produced none/* 

K, had half raised himself and now, smoothing down 
his hair and looking up at the two men, he said ; What 
village is this I have wandered into? Is there, a castle 
here ? ” 

Most certainly,** replied the young man slowly, 
while here and there a head was shaken^ over K/s 
remark, ‘‘ the castle of my lord the Count West-west.** 

''And must one have a permit to sleep here?** 
asked K., as if he wished to assure himself that what 
he had heard was not a dream. 

" One must have a permit,** was the reply, and there 
was an ironical contempt for K. in the young man*s 
gesture as he stretched out his arm and appealed to 
the others, " Or must one not have a permit ? ** 

" Well, then, 1*11 have to go and get one,** said K. 
yawning and pushing his blanket away as if to rise up. 

" And from whom, pray ? ** asked the young man. 

" From the Count,** said K., " that*s the only thing 
to be done/* 

" A permit from the Count in the middle of the night! ** 
cried the young man, stepping back a pace. 

“ Is that impossible ? ** enquired K. coolly. ** Then 
why did you waken me ? ** 

At this the young man flew into a passion. " None of 
your guttersnipe manners ! ** he cried. I insist on 
respect for the Count*s authority I I woke you up to in- 
form you that you must quit the Count's territory at once.** 

“ Enough of this fooling,** said K. in a markedly 
quiet voice, laying himself down again and pulling up 
the blanket. " \ou*re going a little too far, my good " 
fellow, and I'E have something to say to-morrow abotit 
your conduct. The landlord here and those other 



THE CASTLE 


13 

gentlemen will bear me out if necessary. Let me tell 
you that I am the Land Surveyor whom the Count is 
expecting. My assistants are coming on to-morrow 
in a* carriage with the apparatus. I did not want to 
miss the chance of a walk through the snow, but un- 
fortunately lost my way several times and so arrived 
very late. That it was too late to present myself at the 
Castle I knew very well before you saw fit to inform me. 
That is why I have made shift with this bed for the 
night, where, to put it mildly, you have had the dis- 
courtesy to disturb me. That is all I have to say. 
Good night, gentlemen.** And K. turned over on his 
side ^towards the stove. 

Land Surveyor ? *' he heard the hesitating question 
behind his back, and then there was a general silence. 
But the young man soon recovered his assurance, 
and lowering his voice, sufficiently to appear considerate 
of K.*s sleep while yet speaking loud enough to be 
clearly heard, said to the landlord : '' 1*11 ring up and 
enquire.** So there was a telephone in this village 
inn ? They had everything up to the mark. The 
particular instance surprised K., but on the whole he 
had really expected it. It appeared that the telephone 
was placed almost over his head and in his drowsy 
condition he had overlooked it. If the young man 
must needs telephone he could not, even with the best 
intentions, avoid disturbing K., the only question was 
whether K. would let him do so ; he decided to allow 
it. In that case, however, there was no sense in pre- 
tending to sleep, and so he turned on his back again. 
He could see the peasants putting their heads together ; 
•the arrival of a Land Surveyor was no small event. The 
door into the kitchen had been opened, and blocking 
the whole doorway stood the imposing figure of the 



THE CASTLE 


landlady, to whom the landlord was advancing on 
tiptoe in order to tell her what was happening. And 
now the conversation began on the telephone. The 
Castellan was asleep, but an under-castellan, one of 
the under-castellans, a certain Herr Fritz, was ayailable. 
The young man, announcing himself as Schwarzer, 
reported that he had found K., a disreputable-looking 
man in the thirties, sleeping calmly on a bag of straw 
with a minute rucksack for pillow and a knotty stick 
within reach. He had naturally suspected the fellow, 
and as tlic landlord had obviously neglected his duty he, 
Schwarzer, had felt bound to investigate the matter. 
He had roused the man, questioned him, and /duly 
warned him oif the Count's territory, all of which K. 
had taken with an ill grace, perhaps with some justifica- 
tion, as it eventually turned out, for he claimed to be a 
Land Surveyor engaged by the Count. Of course, to 
say the least of it, that was a statement which required 
oiiicial confirmation, and so Schwarzer begged Herr 
I’ritz to enquire in the Central Bureau if a Land 
Surveyor were really expected, and to telephone the 
answ er at once. 

I'hcn there was silence while Fritz was making 

enquiries up there and the young man was waiting for 
the answer. K. did not change his position, did not 
even once turn round, seemed quite indifferent and 
stared into space. Schwarzer's report, in its combina- 
tion of malice and prudence, gave him an idea of the 
measure of diplomac)' in which even underlings in the 
Castle like Schwarzer were versed. Nor were they 
remiss in industr)\ the Central Office had a night 

service. And apparently answered questions quickly, * 
too, for Fritz v\'as already ringing. His reply seemed 

briol enough, for Schwarzer hung up the receiver 



THE CASTLE 


15 

immediately, crying angrily : Just what I said ! 

Not a trace of a Land Surveyor. A common, lying 
tramp, and probably worse/' For a moment K. 
thought that all of them, Schwarzer, the peasants, the 
landlord and the landlady, were going to fall upon him 
in a bddy, and to escape at least the first shock of their 
assault he crawled right underneath the blanket. But 
the telephyne rang agaip, and with a special insistence, 
it seemed to K. Slowly he put out his head. Although 
it was improbable that this message also concerned K. 
they all stopped short and Schwarzer took up the 
receiver once more. He listened to a fairly long state- 
ment, and then said in a low voice : '‘A mistake, is it ? 
I'm' sorry to hear that. The head of the department 
himself said so ? Very queer, very queer. How am 
I to explain it all to the Land Surveyor ? " 

K. pricked up his ears. So the Castle had recog- 
nised him as the Land Surveyor, That was unpro- 
pitious for him, on the one hand, for it meant that 
the Castle was well informed about him, had estimated 
all the probable chances, and was taking up the chal- 
lenge with a smile. On the other hand, however, it 
was quite propitious, for if his interpretation were right 
they had underestimated his strength, and he would 
have more freedom of action than he had dared to hope. 
And if they expected to cow him by their lofty superior- 
ity in recognising him as Land Surveyor, they were 
mistaken ; it made his skin prickle a little, that was all. 

He waved off Schwarzer who was timidly approach- 
ing him, and refused an urgent invitation to transfer 
himself into the landlord's own room ; he only accepted 
a warm drink from the landlord and from the landlady 
% basin to wash in, a piece of soap, and a towel. He 
did not even have to ask that the room should be 



THE CASTLE 


l6 

cleared, for all the men flocked out with averted faces 
lest he should recognise them again next day. The 
lamp was blown out, and he was left in peace at last. 
He slept deeply until morning, scarcely disturbed by 
rats scuttling past once or twice. 

After breakfast, which, according to his host, 'was to 
be paid for by the Castle, together with all the other 
expenses of his board and lodging, he prepared to go 
out immediately into the village. But since the landlord, 
to whom he had been very curt because of his behaviour 
the jTcccding night, kept circling around him in dumb 
entreaty, he took pity on the man and asked him to sit 
down for a while. 

** I haven’t met the Count yet,” said K., ” but he 
pays well for good work, doesn’t he ? When a man 
like me travels so far from home he wants to go back 
with something in his pockets.” 

” 'rhere’s no need for the gentleman to worry about that 
kind of thing ; nobody complains of being badly paid.” 

” Well,” said K., ” I’m not one of your timid people, 
and can give a piece of my mind even to a Count, but 
of course it’s much better to have everything settled up 
without any trouble.” 

I'lic landlord sat opposite K. on the rim of the window- 
ledge, not daring to take a more comfortable seat, and 
kept on gazing at K. with an anxious look in his large 
brown eyes. He had thrust his company on K. at 
hrst, but now it seemed that he was eager to escape. 
Was he afraid of being cross-questioned about the 
Count ? Was he afraid of some indiscretion on the 
part of the “gentleman” whom he took K. to be? 
K. must divert his attention. He looked at the clock, 
and said : ’ My assistants should be arriving soon. 

Will you be able to put them up here ? ” 



THE CASTLE 


17 


'' Certainly, sir," he said, " but won't they be staying 
with you up at the Castle ? " 

Was the landlord so willing, then, to give up pro- 
spective customers, and K. in particular, whom he* so 
unconditionally transferred to the Castle ? 

' I hat's not at all certain yet," said K. "I must 
first find out what work I am expected to do. If I have 
to work^down here, for instance, it would be more 
sensible to lodge down here. I'm afraid, too, that the 
life in the Castle wouldn't suit me. I like to be my own 
master." 

"You don't know the Castle," said the landlord 
quietly. 

*" Of course," replied K., " one shouldn't judge 
prematurely. All that I know at present about the 
Castle is that the people there know how to choose a 
good Land Surveyor. Perhaps it has other attractions 
as well." And he stood up in order to rid the landlord 
of his presence, since the man was biting his lip un- 
easily. His confidence was not to be lightly won. 

As K. was going out he noticed a dark portrait in a 
dim frame on the wall. He had already observed it 
from his couch by the stove, but from that distance he 
had not been able to distinguish any details and had 
thought that it was only a plain back to the frame. But 
it was a picture after all, as now appeared, the bust 
portrait of a man about fifty. His head was sunk so 
low upon his breast that his eyes were scarcely visible, 
and the weight of the high, heavy forehead and the 
strong hooked nose seemed to have borne the head 
down. Because of this pose the man's full beard was 
pressed in at the chin and spread out farther down. 
His left hand was buried in his luxuriant hair, but 
seemed incapable of supporting the head. " Who is 



THE CASTLE 


l8 

that?” asked K., ” the Count?” He was standing 
before the portrait and did not look round at the land- 
lord. ” No,” said the latter, ” the Castellan.” ” A 
handsome castellan, indeed, said K., a pity that he 
has such an ill-bred son.” ” No, no,” said the landlord, 
drawing K. a little towards him and whispering m his 
ear, ” Schwarzer exaggerated yesterday, his father is 
only an under-castellan, and one of the lowest, too.” 
At that moment the landlord struck K. as a very child. 
” The villain ! ” said K. with a laugh, but the landlord 
instead of laughing said, ” Even his father is powerful.” 
” Cict along with you,” said K., ” you think everyone 
|'>owerful. Me too, perhaps?” ” No,” he replied, 
timidly yet seriously, ” I don't think you powerful:” 
” You’re a keen observer,” said K., ” for between you 
and me I’m not really powerful. And consequently I 
suppose I liave no less respect for the powerful than you 
have, only I’m not so honest as you and am not always 
willing to acknowledge it.” And K. gave the landlord 
a tap on the cheek to hearten him and awaken his 
friendliness. It made him smile a little. He was 
actually young, with that soft and almost beardless 
iace of Ins ; how had he come to have that massive, 
elderly wife, who could be seen through a small window 
bustling about the kitchen with her elbows sticking 
out ? K. did not want to force his confidence any 
lurtluT, however, nor to scare aw'ay the smile he had 
at last evoked. So he only signed to him to open the 
door, and went out into the brilliant winter morning. 

Now, he could sec the Castle above him clearly 
defined in the glittering air, its outline made still more 
delinite by the moulding of snow covering it in a thin 
layer. 1 here seemed to be much less snow up there 
on the hill than down in the village, where K. found 



THE CASTLE 


19 

progress as laborious as on the main road the previous 
day. Here the heavy snowdrifts reached right up to the 
cottage windows and began again on the low roofs, but 
uf> on the hill everything soared light and free into the 
air, ^ at least so it appeared from down below. 

On the whole this distant prospect of the Castle 
satisfied K."s expectations. It was neither an old 
stronghold nor a nev* mansion, but a rambling pile 
consisting of innumerable small buildings closely packed 
together and of one or two storeys ; if K. had not known 
that it was a castle he might have taken it for a little 
town. There was only one tower as far as he could 
see, whether it belonged to a dwelling-house or a 
church he could not determine. Swarms of crows 
were circling round it. 

With his eyes fixed on the Castle K. went on farther, 
thinking of nothing else at all. But on approaching 
it he was disappointed in the Castle ; it was after all 
only a wretched-looking town, a huddle of village 
houses, whose sole merit, if any, lay in being built of 
stone, but the plaster had long since flaked off and the 
stone seemed to be crumbling away. K. had a fleeting 
recollection of his native town. It was hardly inferior 
to this so-called Castle, and if it were merely a question 
of enjoying the view it was a pity to have come so far. 
K. would have done better to visit his native town 
again, which he had not seen for such a long time. 
And in his mind he compared the church tower at home 
with the tower above him. The church tower, firm 
in line, soaring unfalteringly to its tapering point, 
topped with red tiles and broad in the roof, an earthly 
building — what else can men build ? — but with a 
• loftier goal than the humble dwelling-houses, and a 
clearer meaning than the muddle of everyday life. The 



10 


THE CASTLE 


tower above him here — the only one visible — ^the tower 
of a house, as was now apparent, perhaps of the main 
building, was uniformly round, part of it graciously 
mantled with ivy, pierced by small windows thsit 
glittered in the sun, a somewhat maniacal glitter, 'and 
topped by what looked like an attic, with battlements 
that were irregular, broken, fumbling, as if designed by 
the trembling or careless hand a child, clearly out- 
lined against the blue. It was as if a melancholy-mad 
tenant who ought to have been kept locked in the top- 
most chamber of his house had burst through the roof 
and lifted himself up to the gaze of the world. 

Again K. came to a stop, as if in standing still he 
had more power of judgment. But he was disturbed. 
Behind the village church where he had stopped — it was 
really only a chapel widened with bam-Iike additions 
so as to accommodate the parishioners — was the school. 
A long, low building, combining remarkably a look of 
great age with a provisional appearance, it lay behind 
a lonccd-in garden which was now a field of snow. 
The children were just coming out with their teacher. 
They thronged round him, all gazing up at him and 
chattering without a break so rapidly that K. could 
not follow what they said. The teacher, a small young 
man witli narrow shoulders and a very upright carriage 
wiiich yet did not make him ridiculous, had already 
fixed K. with his eyes from the distance, naturally 
enough, for apart from the school-children there was 
not another human being in sight. Being the stranger, 
K. made the first advance, especially as the other was 
an authoritative-looking little man. and said ; “ Good 
inorning, sir. As if by one accord the children fell 
silent, perhaps the master liked to have a sudden still- ■ 
ness as a preparation for his words. " You are looking 



THE CASTLE 


21 


at the Castle ? he asked more gently than K. had 
expected, but with an inflection that denoted dis- 
approval of K/s occupation. ** Yes," said K. " I. am 
a stranger here, I came to the village only last night." 
" Y\u don't like the Castle ? " returned the teacher 
quickly. " What ? " countered K., a little taken aback, 
and repeated the question in a modified form. " Do 
I like th^ Castle ? Why do you assume that I don't like 
it ? " " Strangers never do," said the teacher. To 

avoid saying the wrong thing K. changed the subject 
and asked : "I suppose you know the Count ? " " No," 
said the teacher turning away. But K. would not be 
pat off and asked again : " What, you don't know the 
Count ? " " Why should I ? " replied the teacher in a 

low tone, and added aloud in French : " Please 

remember that there are innocent children present." 
K. took this as a justification for asking : " Might I come 
to pay you a visit one day, sir ? I am to be staying here 
for some time and already feel a little lonely. I don't 
fit in with the peasants nor, I imagine, with the Castle." 
" There is no difference between the peasantry and 
the Castle," said the teacher. " Maybe," said K., 
" that doesn't alter my position. Can I pay you a visit 
one day ? " "I live in Swan Street at the butcher's." 
That was assuredly more of a statement than an in- 
vitation, but K. said : " Right, I'll come." The 

teacher nodded and moved on with his batch of 
children, who began to scream again immediately. 
They soon vanished in a steeply descending by-street. 

But K. was disconcerted, irritated by the conversation. 
For the first time since his arrival he felt really tired. 
The long journey he had made seemed at first to have 
imposed no strain upon him — how quietly he had 
sauntered through the days, step by step ! — but now 



22 


THE CASTLE 


the consequences of his exertion were making them- 
selves felt, and at the wrong time, too. He felt irre- 
sistibly drawn to seek out new acquaintances, bur each 
new acquaintance only seemed to increase his weariness. 
If he forced himself in his present condition to go on at 
least as far as the Castle entrance, he would have done 
more than enough. 

So he resumed his walk, but» the way prefixed long. 
For the street lie was in, the main street of the village, 
did not lead up to the Castle hill, it only made towards 
it and then, as if deliberately, turned aside, and though 
it did not lead away from the Castle it got no nearer 
to it cither. At every turn K. expected the road to 
double back to the Castle, and only because of this 
expectation did he go on ; he was flatly unwilling 
tired as he was, to leave the street, and he was also 
ama/cd at the length of the village, which seemed to 
have no end ; again and again the same little houses, 
and frost-bound window-panes and snow and the 
entire absence of liuman beings — but at last he tore 
himself away from the obsession of the street and escaped 
into a small sidc-lanc, where the snow was still deeper 
and the exertion of lifting one’s feet clear was fatiguing ,* 
he broke into a sweat, suddenly came to a stop, and 
could not go on. 

Well, he w\is not on a desert island, there were 
cottages to right and left of him. He made a snow- 
ball and threw it at a window. The door opened 
immediately — the first door that had opened during 
the w'hole length of the village — and there appeared 
an old peasant in a brown fur jacket, with his head 
cocked to one side, a frail and kindly figure. ** May 
I come into your house for a little ? ” asked K., Tm 
veiy tired. He did not hear tlie old man’s reply, but 



THE CASTLE 


23 

thankfully observed that a plank was pushed out 
towards him to rescue him from the snow, and in a few 
steps he was in the kitchen. 

A large kitchen, dimly lit. Anyone coming in from 
Dutsi^ie could make out nothing at first. K. stumbled 
over a washing-tub, a woman's hand steadied him. 
The crying of children came loudly from one comer. 
From anoflier steam was welling out and turning the 
dim light into darkness. K. stood as if in the clouds. 

He must be drunk," said somebody. " Who are 
^ou ? " cried a hectoring voice, and then obviously to 
the old man : " Why did you let him in ? Are we to 
let. in everybody that wanders about in the street ? " 

I am the Count's Land Surveyor," said K., trying to 
justify himself before this still invisible personage. " Oh, 
it's the Land Surveyor," said a woman's voice, and then 
:ame a complete silence. "You know me, then ? " 
asked K. " Of course," said the same voice curtly. 
The fact that he was known did not seem to be a 
recommendation. 

At last the steam thinned a little, and K. was able 
^adually to make things out. It seemed to be a 
general washing-day. Near the door clothes were 
being washed. But the steam was coming from another 
:orner, where in a wooden tub larger than any K. had 
:ver seen, as wide as two beds, two men were bathing 
in steaming water. But still more astonishing, although 
3ne could not say what was so astonishing about it. 
was the scene in the right-hand comer. From a large 
Dpening, the only one in the back wall, a pale snowy 
'ight came in, apparently from the courtyard, and 
yave a gleam as of silk to the dress of a woman who was 
ilmost reclining in a high arm-chair. She was suckling 
in infant at her breast. Several children were playing 



THE CASTLE 


24 

£iroun<i her, peasant children, as was obvious, but she 
seemed to be of another class, although of course illness 
ancl weariness give even peasants a look of refinement* 

** Sit down ! ** said one of the men, who had a full 
beard and breathed heavily through his mouth »which 
always hung open, pointing— it was a furmy sight — with 
his wet hand over the edge of the tub towards a settle, 
and showering drops of warm water all over K.^s face as 
he did so. On the settle the old man who had ad- 
mitted K. was already sitting, sunk in vacancy* K. was 
thankful to find a scat at last. Nobody paid any 
further attention to him* The woman at the washing- 
tub, young, plump and fair, sang in a low voice as 6he 
worked, the men stamped and rolled about in the bath, 
the children tried to get closer to them but were con- 
stantly driven back by mighty splashes of water which 
fell on K., too, and the woman in the arm-chair lay as 
if lifeless staring at the roof without even a glance 
towards the child at her bosom. 

She made a beautiful, sad, fixed picture, and K. 
looked at her for wdiat must have been a long time ; 
then he must have fallen asleep, for when a loud voice 
roused him he found that his head was lying on the 
old man's sliouldcr. The men had finished with the 
tub— in w'liich the children were now wallowing in 
charge of the fair-haired woman — and were standing 
fully dressed before K. It appeared that the hectoring 
one with the full beard was the less important of the 
tw'o. The other, a still slow-thinking man who kept 
his head bent, was not taller than his companion and 
had a much smaller beard, but he was broader in the 
shoulders and had a broad face as well, and he it was 
who said : You can't stay here, sir. Excuse the dis- 
courtesy. I don t want to stay," said K., I only 



THE CASTLE 


25 

wanted to rest a little. I have rested, and now I shall 
go/' You're probably surprised at our lack of 
hosj^itality," said the man, ‘‘ but hospitality is not our 
custom here, we have no use for visitors." Somewhat 
refresNed by his sleep, his perceptions somewhat 
quickened, K. was pleased by the man's frankness. He 
felt less constrained, poked with his stick here and 
there, appfoached the owoman in the arm-chair, and 
noted that he was physically the biggest man in the room. 

"To be sure," said K., " what use would you have 
for visitors ? But still you need one now and then, me, 
for example, the Land Surveyor." " I don't know 
abqut that," replied the man slowly. " If you've been 
asked to come you're probably needed, that's an 
exceptional case, but we small people stick to our 
tradition, and you can't blame us for that." "No, no," 
said K., "I am only grateful to you and everybody 
here." And taking them all by surprise he made an 
adroit turn and stood before the reclining woman. 
Out of weary blue eyes she looked at him, a trans- 
parent silk kerchief hung down to the middle of her 
forehead, the infant was asleep on her bosom. " Who 
are you ? " asked K., and disdainfully — whether con- 
temptuous of K. or her own answer was not clear — she 
replied ; "A girl from the Castle." 

It had only taken a second or so, but already the 
two men were at either side of K. and were pushing 
him towards the door, as if there were no other means 
of persuasion, silently, but putting out all their strength. 
Something in this procedure delighted the old man, and 
he clapped his hands. The woman at the bath-tub 
laughed too, and the children suddenly shouted like mad. 
• K. was soon out in the street, and from the threshold 
the two men surveyed him. Snow was again falling. 



THE CASTLE 


26 

yet the sky seemed a little brighter. The bearded man 
cried impatiently : Where do you want to go ? This 
is the way to the Castle, and that to the village."' K. 
made no reply to him, but turned to the other, who 
in spite of his shyness seemed to him the more amiable 
of the two, and said : Who are you ? Whom have 

I to thank for sheltering me ? " ** 1 am the tanner 

Lnseinann," was the answer, “abut you ow^ thanks to 
nobody.** “ All right,** said K., “ perhaps we*ll meet 
again.** ** I don*t suppose so,** said the man. At that 
moment the other cried, with wave of his hand ; “ Good 
morning, Arthur ; good morning, Jeremiah ! ** K. 
turned round ; so there were really people to be seen 
in the village streets I From the direction of the Castle 
came two young men of medium height, both very 
slim, in tight-fitting clothes, and like each other in their 
features. Altliough their skin was a dusky brown the 
blackness of their little pointed beards was actually 
striking by contrast. Considering the state of the 
road, they were v^'alking at a great pace, their slim legs 
keeping time. “ Where are you off to? ** shouted the 
l^earded man. One had to shout to them, they were 
going so fast and they would not stop. ** On business,** 
(hey slioutcd back, laughing. ** Where ? ** ** At the 

mn." “ I'm going there too,** yelled K. suddenly, 
louder than all the rest ; he felt a strong desire to 
accompany them, not that he expected much from 
their acquaintance, but they were obviously good and 
jolly companions. They heard him, but only nodded, 
and were already out of sight. 

K. was still stanching in the snow, and was little 
inclined to extricate his feet only for the sake of plunging 
them in again ; the tanner and his comrade, satisfied 
with having finally got rid of him, edged slowly into the 



THE CASTLE 


27 


house through the door which was now barely ajar, 
casting backward glances at K., and he was left alone 
in the falling snow. A fine setting for a fit of despair," 
it occurred to him, " if I were only standing here by 
accident instead of design." 

Just then in the hut on his left hand a tiny window 
was opened, which had seemed quite blue when shut, 
perhaps ffoffn the reflection of the snow, and was so 
tiny that when opened it did not permit the whole face 
of the person behind it to be seen, but only the eyes, 
old brown eyes. " There he is," K. heard a woman's 
trembling voice say. " It's the Land Surveyor," 
ans^yered a man's voice. Then the man came to the 
window and asked, not unamiably, but still as if he 
were anxious to have no complications in front of his 
house : " Are you waiting for somebody ? " " For a 

sledge, to pick me up," said K. " No sledges will pass 
here," said the man, " there's no traffic here." " But 
it's the road leading to the Castle," objected K. " All 
the same, all the same," said the man with a certain 
finality, " there's no traffic here." Then they were both 
silent. But the man was obviously thinking of some- 
thing, for he kept the window open. " It's a bad road," 
said K., to help him out. The only answer he got, 
however, was ; " Oh yes." But after a little the man 
volunteered : "If you like, I'll take you in my sledge." 
" Please do," said K. delighted, " what is your charge ? " 
" Nothing," said the man. K. was very surprised. 
" Well, you're the Land Surveyor," explained the man, 
" and you belong to the Castle. Where do you want to 
be taken ? " "To the Castle," returned K. quickly. 

I won't take you there," said the man without hesita- 
tit)n. " But I belong to the Castle," said K., repeating 
the other's very words. " Maybe," said the man 



THE CASTLE 


28 

shortly. Oh, well, take me to the inn," said K. All 
right," said the man, '' I'll be out with the sledge in 
a moment." His whole behaviour had the appearance 
of springing not from any special desire to be friendly 
but rather from a kind of selfish, worried, andr almost 
pedantic insistence on shifting K. away from the front 
of the house. 

The gate of the courtyard opened, and a small light 
sledge, quite flat, without a seat of any kind, appeared, 
drawn by a feeble little horse, and behind it limped the 
man, a weakly stooped figure with a gaunt red snuffling 
face tliat looked peculiarly small beneath a tightly 
swathed woollen scarf. He was obviously ailing, .and 
yet only to transport K. he had dragged himself out. 
K. ventured to mention it, but the man waved him 
aside. All that K. elicited was that he was a coachman 
called Gcrstacker, and that he had taken this uncom- 
fortable sledge because it was standing ready, and to 
get out one of the others would have wasted too much 
lime. " Sit down," he said, pointing to the sledge, 
" ril sit beside you,'’ said K. " Tm going to walk," 
said Gcrstacker. " But why? " asked K. " I'm going 
to walk," repeated Gerstacker, and was seized with a 
lit of coughing which shook him so severely that he 
had to brace his legs in the snow and hold on to the rim 
of the sledge. K. said no more, but sat down on the 
sledge, the man’s cough slowly abated, and they drove off. 

The Castle above them, which K. had hoped to 
reach that very day, was already beginning to grow 
dark, and retreated again into the distance. But as 
il to give him a parting sign till their next encounter 
a bell began to ring merrily up there, a bell which for' 
at least a second made his heart palpitate for its tone 
was menacing, too, as if it threatened him with the 



THE CASTLE 


29 

fulfilment of his vague desire. This great bell soon 
died away, however, and its place was taken by a feeble 
monotonous little tinkle which might have come from 
the Castle, but might have been somewhere in the village. 
It certainly harmonised better with the slow-going journey, 
with the wretched-looking yet inexorable iiver. 

"I say,*' cried K. suddenly — they were already near 
the church, the inn was nc^t far off, and K. felt he could 
risk something — “ Tm surprised that you have the 
nerve to drive me round on your own responsibility ; 
are you allowed to do that } Gerstacker paid no 
attention, but went on walking quietly beside the little 
horse. ** Hi ! ** cried K., scraping some snow from the 
sledge and flinging a snowball which hit Gerstacker full 
in the ear. That made him stop and turn round ; but 
when K. saw him at such close quarters — the sledge had 
slid forward a little — this stooping and somehow ill- 
used figure with the thin red tired face and cheeks that 
were different — one being flat and the other fallen in — 
standing listening with his mouth open, displaying only 
a few isolated teeth, he found that what he had just 
said out of malice had to be repeated out of pity, that 
is, whether Gerstacker was likely to be penalised for 
driving him about. What do you mean ? ” asked 
Gerstacker incomprehendingly, but without waiting for 
an answer he spoke to the horse and they moved on again. 


n 

W HEN by a turn in the road K. recognised that they 
were near the inn, he was greatly surprised to 
see that darkness had already set in. Had he been gone 



THE CASTLE 


30 

for such a long time ? Surely not for more than an hour 
or two, by his reckoning. And it had been morning 
when he left. And he had not felt any need of food. 
And just a short time ago it had been uniform daylight, 
and now the darkness of night was upon them. * ' Short 
days, short days/' be said to himself, slipped off the 
sledge, and went towards the inn. 

At the top of the little fligljt of steps leading into the 
house stood the landlord, a welcome figure, holding up 
a lighted lantern. Remembering his conductor for a 
fleeting moment K. stood still, there was a cough in the 
darkness behind him, that was he. Well, he would see 
him again soon. Not until he was level with the land- 
lord, who greeted him humbly, did he notice two men, 
one on either side of the doorway. He took the lantern 
from his host’s hand and turned the light upon them ; 
it was tlic men he had already met, who were called 
Arthur and Jeremiah. They now saluted him. That 
reminded him of his soldiering days, happy days for him, 
and he laughed, Who are you ? ” he asked, looking 
from one to the other, Your assistants,” they answered. 
” It's your assistants,” corroborated the landlord in a low 
voice. ” What ? ” said K., ” are you my old assistants 
wiiom I told to follow me and whom I am expecting ? ” 
rhey answered in the affirmative. ” That's good,” 
observed K. after a short pause. “ I'm glad you've 
come.” ” Well,” he said, after another pause, ” you've 
come very late, you’re very slack.” ” It was a long way 
to come,” said one of them. ” A long way ? ” repeated 
K., but I met you just now coming from the Castle.” 
” Yes,” said they without further explanation. ” Where 
is the apparatus? ” asked K. “ We haven’t any,” said 
they. “ The apparatus I gave you? ” said K. ” We 
haven’t any,” they reiterated. Oh, you are fine 



THE CASTLE 


31 

fellows ! said K., do you know anything about sur- 
veying ? ** No/' said they, But if you are my old 

assistants you must know something about it/' said K. 
They made no reply. “ Well, come in," said K., pushing 
them before him into the house. 

They sat down then all three together over their beer 
at a small table, saying little, K. in the middle with an 
assistant on^ach side. As on the other evening, there 
was only one other table occupied by a few peasants. 
" You're a difficult problem," said K., comparing them, 
as he had already done several times. "How am I to 
know one of you from the other ? The only difference 
between you is your names, otherwise you're as like 
as . ! He stopped, and then went on involuntarily, 
' You're as like as two snakes." They smiled. " People 
usually manage to distinguish us quite well," they said 
in self-justification. " I am sure they do,*' said K., " I 
was a witness of that myself, but I can only see with my 
own eyes, and with them I can't distinguish you. So 
I shall treat you as if you were one man and call you 
both Arthur, that's one of your names, yours, isn't it ? " 
he asked one of them. " No," said the man, " I'm 
Jeremiah." " It doesn't matter," said K. " I'll call you 
both Arthu If I tell Arthur to go anywhere you must 
both go. If I give Arthur something to do you must both 
do it, that has the great disadvantage for me of prevent- 
ing me from employing you on separate jobs, but the 
advantage that you will both be equally responsible for 
anything I tell you to do. How you divide the work 
between you doesn't matter to me, only you're not to 
excuse yourselves by blaming each other, for me you’re 
gnly one man." They considered this, and said : " We 
shouldn't like that at all." " I don't suppose so," said 
K. ; ‘‘ of course you won't like it, but that's how it has 



THE CASTLE 


to be/" For some little time one of the peasants had been 
sneaking round the table and K. had noticed him ; now 
the fellow took courage and went up to one of the assist- 
ants to whisper something. " Excuse me/' said K., 
bringing his hand down on the table and rising^'to his 
feet, “ these are my assistants and we're discussing private 
business. Nobody is entitled to disturb us." " Sorry, 
sir, sorry," muttered the peasant anxiouslj^ retreating 
backwards towards his friends. " And this is my most 
important charge to you," said K., sitting down again. 

You're not to speak to anyone without my permission. 
I am a stranger here, and if you are my old assistants 
you are strangers too. We three strangers must stand 
by each other therefore, give me your hands on that." 
All too eagerly they stretched out their hands to K. 
" Never mind the trimming," said he, " but remember 
that my command holds good. I shall go to bed now, 
and I recommend you to do the same. To-day we have 
missed a day's work, and to-morrow we must begin very 
early. You must get hold of a sleigh for taking me to the 
Castle and have it ready outside the house at six o'clock." 
" Veiy well," said one. But the other interrupted him. 
" You say ‘ very well and yet you know it can't be 
done." " Silence," said K. " You're trying already 
to dissociate yourselves from each other." But then the 
first man broke in : " He's right, it can't be done, no 
stranger can get into the Castle without a permit." 
"Where does one apply for a permit?" "I don't 
know, pcrliaps to the Castellan." " Then we'll apply 
by telephone, go and telephone to the Castellan at 
once, both of you." They rushed to the instrument, 
asked for the connection — how eager they were about it !, 
in externals they were absurdly docile — and enquired 
if K. could come with them nert morning into the 



THE CASTLE 


33 

Castle. The No ** of the answer was audible even to 
K. at his table. But the answer went on and was still 
more explicit, it ran as follows : Neither to-morrow 

nor •at any other time.** ** I shall telephone myself,** 
said K., and got up. While K. and his assistants 
hitherto had passed nearly imremarked except for the 
incident with the one peasant, his last statement 
aroused geij/eral attention. They all got up when K. 
did, and although the ^landlord tried to drive them 
away, crowded round him in a close semicircle at the 
telephone. The general opinion among them was that 
K. would get no answer at all. K. had to beg them to be 
quiet, saying he did not want to hear their opinion. 

The receiver gave out a buzz of a kind that K. had 
never before heard on a telephone. It was like the 
hum of countless children*s voices — but yet not a hum, 
the echo rather of voices singing at an infinite distance 
—blended by sheer impossibility into one high but 
resonant sound which vibrated on the ear as if it were 
trying to penetrate beyond mere hearing. K. listened 
without attempting to telephone, leaning his left arm 
on the telephone shelf. 

He did not know how long he had stood there, but 
he stood until the landlord pulled at his coat saying 
that a messenger had come to speak with him. Go 
away ! ** yelled K. in an access of rage, perhaps into the 
mouthpiece, for someone immediately answered from 
the other end. The following conversation ensued ; 
“ Oswald speaking, who*s there ? ** cried a severe 
arrogant voice with a small defect in its speech, as 
seemed to K., which its owner tried to cover by an 
exaggerated severity. K. hesitated to announce him- 
self, for he was at the mercy of the telephone, the other 
could shout him down or hang up the receiver, and that 
2 



THE CASTLE 


34 

might mean the blocking of a not unimportant way 
of access. K.*s hesitation made the man impatient, 
** Who's there 5 he repeated, adding, '' I should be 
obliged if there was less telephoning from down there, 
only a minute ago somebody rang up.'' K. ignored 
this remark, and announced with sudden decision : 
“ The Land Surveyor's assistant speaking." " What 
Land Surveyor ? What assistant ? " K., recollected 

yesterday’s telephone conversation, and said briefly, 
" Ask Fritz." This succeeded, to his own astonishment. 
»But even more than at his success he was astonished at 
the organisation of the Castle service. The answer came : 
" Oh, yes. That everlasting Land Surveyor. Quite so. 
What about it ? What assistant ? " " Joseph," said K. 
He was a little put out by the murmuring of the peasants 
behind his back, obviously they disapproved of his ruse. 
Jlc liad no time to bother about them, however, for 
the conversation absorbed all his attention. " Joseph J " 
came the question. " But the assistants are called . . ." 
there was a short pause, evidently to enquire the names 
from somebody else, " Arthur and Jeremiah." " These 
arc the new assistants," said K. " No, they are the old 
ones." " They arc the new ones, I am the old assistant ; 
1 came to-day after the Land Surveyor." " No," was 
shouted back. " Then who am I ? " asked K. as 
blandly as before. ^ 

And after a pause the same voice with the same defect 
answered him, yet with a deeper and more authoritativi 
tone : " You arc the old assistant." 

K. was listening to the new note, and almost missec 
the question : " What is it you want ? " He felt lik< 
laying dow'n the receiver. He had ceased to expect 
anything from this conversation. But being pressed, 
he replied quick!)' : " When can my master come to 



THE CASTLE 35 

the Castle ? " Never/' was the answer. " Very well/' 

said K., and hung the receiver up. 

Behind him die peasants had crowded quite close. 
Hi5 assistants, with many side glances in his direction, 
were 'trying to keep them back. But they seemed not 
to take the matter very seriously, and in any case the 
peasants, satisfied with the result of the conversation, 
were beginning to give ^ound. A man came cleaving 
his way with rapid steps through the group, bowed 
before K. and handed him a letter. K. took it, but 
looked at the man, who for the moment seemed to him 
the more important. There was a great resemblance 
between this new-comer and the assistants, he was slim 
like them and clad in the same tight-fitting garments, 
had the same suppleness and agility, and yet he was 
quite different. How much K.. would have preferred 
him ^ an assistant ! He reminded K. a little of the 
girl with the infant whom he had seen at the tanner's. 
He was clothed nearly all in white, not in silk, of course ; 
he was in winter clothes like all the others, but the 
material he was wearing had the softness and dignity 
of silk. His face was clear and frank, his eyes larger 
than ordinary. His smile was unusually jpyous ; he 
drew his hand over his face as if to conce^ the smile, 
but in vain. '' Who are you ? " asked K. "My name 
is Barnabas," said he, "I am a messenger." His lips 
were strong and yet gentle as he spoke. " Do you 
approve of this kind of thing? " asked K., pointing to 
the peasants for whom he was still an object of curiosity, 
and who stood gaping at him with their open mouths, 
coarse lips, and literally tortured faces — their heads 
* looked as if they had been beaten flat on top and there 
features as if the pain of the beating had twisted them 
to the present shape — and yet they ^were not exactly 



THE CASTLE 


36 

gaping at him, for their eyes often flitted away and 
studied some indifferent object in the room before 
fixing on him again, and then K. pointed also to his 
assistants who stood linked together, cheek against 
cheek, and smiling, but whether submissively or ifiock- 
ingly could not be determined. All these he pointed 
out as if presenting a train of followers forced upon him 
by circumstances, and as if he ^expected Barnabas — that 
indicated intimacy, it occurred to K. — always to dis- 
criminate between him and them. But Barnabas — 
quite innocently, it was clear — ignored the question, 
letting it pass as a well-bred servant ignores some remark 
of lus master only apparently addressed to him, and 
merely surveyed the room in obedience to the question, 
greeting by a {pressure of the hand various acquaintances 
among the peasants and exchanging a few words with 
the assistants, all with a free independence which set 
him apart from the others. Rebuffed but not mortified, 
K. returned to the letter in his hand and opened it. 
Its contents were as follows : ** My dear Sir, As you 
know, you have been engaged for the Count's service. 
Your immediate superior is the Superintendent of the 
village, who will give you all particulars about your 
work and the terms of your employment, and to whom 
you are responsible. I myself, however, will try not to 
lose sight of you. Barnabas, the bearer of this letter* 
will report himself to you from time to time to learn 
your wishes and communicate them to me. You will 
find me always ready to oblige you, in so far as that is 
possible. I desire my workers to be contented.” The 
signature was illegible, but stamped beside it was 
” Chief of Department X.” ” Wait a little I ” said K. 
to Barnabas, who bowed before him, then he com- 
manded the landlord to show him to his room, for he 



THE CASTLE 


37 

wanted to be alone with the letter for a while. At the 
same time he reflected that Barnabas, although so 
attractive, was still only a messenger, and ordered a 
mug of beer for him. He looked to see how Barnabas 
wouM take it, but Barnabas was obviously quite pleased 
and began to drink the beer at once. Then K. went 
off with the landlord. The house was so small that 
nothing w^ available for K. but a little attic room, and 
even that had caused some difficulty, for two maids 
who had hitherto slept in it had had to be quartered 
elsewhere. Nothing indeed had been done but to clear 
the maids out, the room was otherwise quite unprepared, 
no sheets on the single bed, only some pillows and a 
horse-blanket still in the same rumpled state as in the 
morning. A few sacred pictures and photographs of 
soldiers were on the walls, the room had not even been 
aired ,* obviously they hoped that the new guest would 
not stay long, and were doing nothing to encourage 
him. K. felt no resentment, however, wrapped himself 
in the blanket, sat down at the table, and began to 
read the letter again by the light of a candle. 

It was not a consistent letter ; in part it dealt with 
him as with a free man whose independence was recog- 
nised, the mode of address for example, and the reference 
to his wishes. But there were other places in which he 
was directly or indirectly treated as a minor employee, 
hardly visible to the Heads of Departments ; the writer 
would try to make an effort “ not to lose sight " of him, 
his superior was only the village Superintendent to 
whom he was actually responsible, probably his sole 
colleague would be the village policeman. These were 
inconsistencies, no doubt about it. They were so obvious 
that they had to be faced. It hardly occurred to K. 
that they might be due to indecision ; that seemed a 



THE CASTLE 


38 

mad idea in connection with such an organisation* He 
was much more inclined to read into them a frankly 
offered choice, which left it to him to make what he 
liked out of the letter, whether he preferred to become a 
village worker with a distinctive but merely apparent 
connection with the Castle, or an ostensible village 
worker whose real occupation was determined through 
the medium of Barnabas. K. did not hesitate in his 
choice, and would not have hesitated even had he lacked 
the experience which had befallen him since his arrival. 
Only as a worker in the village, removed as far as possible 
from the sphere of the Castle, could he hope to achieve 
anything in the Castle itself ; the village folk, who weie 
now so suspicious of him, would begin to talk to him 
once he was their fellow-citizen, if not exactly their 
friend ; and if he were to become indistinguishable 
from Gerstacker or Lasemann — and that must happen 
as soon as possible, everything depended on that—then 
all kinds or paths would be thrown open to him, which 
would remain not only for ever closed to him but quite 
invisible were he to depend merely on the favour of the 
gentlemen in the Castle, There was of course a danger, 
and that was suilicicntly emphasised in the letter, even 
elaborated with a certain satisfaction, as if it were un- 
avoidable. That w'as sinking to the workman's level — 
service, superior work, terms of employment, responsible 
workers the letter fairly reeked of it, and even though 
more personal messages were included they were written 
from the standpoint of an employer. If K. were willing 
to become a workman he could do so, but he would 
lave to do it in grim earnest, without any other prospect. 

new that he had no real compulsory discipline to 
lear, he was not afraid of that, an 1 in this case least of 
® » ut 1 1 C pressure of a discouraging environment, of 



THE CASTLE 


39 

a growing resignation to disappointment, the pressure 
of the imperceptible influences of every moment, these 
things he did fear, but tliat was a danger he would 
have to guard against. Nor did the letter pass over 
the feet that if it should come to a struggle K. had had 
the hardihood to make the first advances ; it was very 
subtly indicated and only to be sensed by an uneasy 
conscience— an uneasy conscience, not a bad one — it 
lay in the three words as you know,*' referring to his 
engagement in the Count's service. K. had reported 
his arrival, and only after that, as the letter pointed out, 
had he known that he was engaged. 

K. took down a picture from the wall and stuck the 
letter on the nail, this was the room he was to live in 
and the letter should hang there. 

Then he went down to the inn parlour. Barnabas 
was sitting at a table with the assistants. " Oh, there 
you are," said K, without any reason, only because he 
was glad to see Barnabas, who jumped to his feet at 
once. Hardly had K. shown his face when the peasants 
got up and gathered round him — it had become a habit 
of theirs to follow him around. " What are you always 
following me about for ? " cried K. They were not 
offended, and slowly drifted back to their seats again. 
One of them in passing said casually in apology, with 
an enigmatic smile which was reflected on several of 
the others' faces : " There's always something new to 
listen to," and he licked his lips as if news were meat 
and drink to him. K, said nothing conciliatory, it was 
good for them to have a little respect for him, but hardly 
had he reached Barnabas when he felt a peasant 
. breathing down the back of his neck. He had only 
come, he said, for the salt-cellar, but K. stamped his 
foot with rage and the peasant scuttled away without 



THE CASTLE 


40 

the salt-cellar. It was really easy to get at K., all one 
had to do was to egg on the peasants against him, their 
persistent interference seemed much more objectionable 
to him than the reserve of the others, nor were they free 
from reserve either, for if he had sat down at their' table 
they would not have stayed. Only the presence of 
Barnabas restrained him from making a scene. But he 
turned round to scowl at them, and found that they, 
too, were all looking at him. When he saw them sitting 
like that, however, each man in his own place, not 
speaking to one another and without any apparent 
mutual understanding, united only by the fact that they 
were all gazing at him, he concluded that it was not 
out of malice that they pursued him, perhaps they really 
wanted something from him and were only incapable 
of expressing it, if not that, it might be pure childishness, 
which seemed to be in fashion at the inn ; was not the 
landlord himself childish, standing there stock-still 
gazing at K. with a glass of beer in his hand which he 
should have been carrying to a customer, and oblivious 
of his wife, who ^^'as leaning out of the kitchen hatch 
calling to him ? 

With a quieter mind K. turned to Barnabas ; he 
would have liked to dismiss his assistants, but could 
not think of an excuse. Besides, they were brooding 
peacefully over their beer. The letter,'' began K., 

“ I have read it. Do you know the contents ? " No," 
said Barnabas, whose look seemed to imply more than 
his words. Perhaps K, was as mistaken in Barnabas's 
goodness as in the malice of the peasants, but his presence 
remained a comfort. " You are mentioned in the letter, 
too, you are supposed to carry messages now and then* 
from me to the Chief, that's why I thought you might 
know the contents." " I was only told," said Barnabas, 



THE CASTLE 


41 

to give you the letter, to wait until you had read it, 
and then to bring back a verbal or written answer if 
you thought it needful/' ** Very well," said K., 
" there's no need to write anything ; convey to the 
Chief — by the way, what's his name ? I couldn't read 
his signature." " Klamm," said Barnabas. " Well, 
convey to Herr Klamm my thanks for his recognition 
and for hi» great kindrjess, which I appreciate, being 
as I am one who has not yet proved his worth here. 
I shall follow his instructions faithfully. I have no 
particular requests to make for to-day." Barnabas, 
who had listened with close attention, asked to be 
allowed to recapitulate the message. K. assented, 
Barnabas repeated it word for word. Then he rose to 
take his leave. 

K. had been studying his face the whole time, and 
now he gave it a last survey. Barnabas was about the 
same height as K., but his eyes seemed to look down 
on K., yet that was almost in a kind of humility, it was 
impossible to think that this man could put anyone to 
shame. Of course he was only a messenger, and did 
not know the contents of the letters he carried, but the 
expression in his eyes, his smile, his bearing, seemed 
also to convey a message, however little he might know 
about it. And K. shook him by the hand, which seemed 
obviously to surprise him, for he had been going to 
content himself with a bow. 

As soon as he had gone — before opening the door 
he had leaned his shoulder against it for a moment and 
embraced the room generally in a final glance — K. said 
to the assistants : " I'll bring down the plans from my 
room, and then we'll discuss what work is to be done 
first." They wanted to accompany him. " Stay here," 
said K. Still they tried to accompany him. K. had to 



THE CASTLE 


42 

repeat his command more authoritatively. Barnabas 
was no longer in the hall. But he had only just gone 
out. Yet in front of the house — fresh snow was falling — 
K. could not sec him either. He called out : Barnabas ! " 
No answer. Could he still be in the house ? Nothing 
else seemed possible. None the less K. yelled the name 
with the full force of his lungs. It thundered through 
the night. And from the distance came a fakit response, 
so far away was Barnabas already. K. called him back, 
and at the same time went to meet him ; the spot 
where they encountered each other was no longer visible 
from the inn. 

“ Barnabas,*’ said K., and could not keep his voice 
from trembling, ” I have something else to say to you. 
And that reminds me that it’s a bad arrangement to 
leave me dependent on your chance comings for sending 
a message to the Castle. If I hadn’t happened to catch 
you just now — how you fly along, I thought you were 
still in the house — who knows how long I might have 
had to wait for your next appearance.” “You can 
ask the Chief,” said Barnabas, “ to send me at definite 
times appointed by yourself.” “ Even that would not 
suflicc,” said K., “ I might have nothing to say for a 
year at a time, but something of urgent importance might 
occur to me a quarter of an hour after you had gone,” 

“ Well,” said Barnabas, “ shall I report to the Chief 
that between him and you some other means of com- 
munication should be established instead of me ? ” 

“ No, no,” sSaid K., “ not at all, I only mention the 
matter in passing, for this time I have been lucky enough 
to catch you.” “ Shall we go back to the inn,” said 
Barnabas, “ so that you can give me the new message* 
there? ” He had already taken a step in the direction 
of the inn. Barnabas,” said K., “ it isn’t necessary, 



THE CASTLE 


43 

ril go a part of the way with you/' " Why don't you 
want to go to the inn ? " asked Barnabas. ‘‘ The 
people there annoy me/* said K. ; you saw for yourself 
how persistent the peasants are/* We could go into 
your Yoom/* said Barnabas. It*s the maids* room," 
said K., " dirty and stuffy — it*s to avoid staying there 
that I want to accompany you for a little, only,** he 
added, in oij^ler finally to overcome Barnabas*s reluctance, 
" you must let me take your arm, for you are surer of 
foot than I am.** And K. took his arm. It was quite 
dark, K. could not see Barnabas's face, his figure was 
only vaguely discernible, he had had to grope for his 
arm a minute or two. 

Bafnabas yielded and they moved away from the inn. 
K. realised, indeed, that his utmost efforts could not 
enable him to keep pace with Barnabas, that he was a 
drag on him, and that even in ordinary circumstances 
this trivial accident might be enough to ruin everything, 
not to speak of side-streets like the one in which he had got 
stuck that morning, out of which he could never struggle 
unless Barnabas were to carry him. But he banished 
all such anxieties, and was comforted by Barnabas's 
silence ,* for if they went on in silence then Barnabas, 
too, must feel that their excursion together was the sole 
reason for their association. 

They went on, but K. did not know whither, he could 
discern nothing, not even whether they had already 
passed the church or not. The effort which it cost him 
merely to keep going made him lose control of his 
thoughts. Instead of remaining fixed on their goal 
they strayed. Memories of his home kept recurring 
•and filled his mind. There, too, a church stood in the 
market-place, partly surrounded by an old graveyard 
which was again surrounded by a high wall. Very few 



the castle 


44 

boys had managed to climb that wall, and for some time 
K., too, had failed. It was not curiosity which had 
urged them on. The graveyard had been no mystery 
to them. They had often entered it through a small 
wicket-gate, it was only the smooth high wall that they 
had wanted to conquer. But one morning — the empty, 
quiet market-place had been flooded with sunshine, 
when had K. ever seen it lijce that either before oi 
since ? — he had succeeded in climbing it with astonishing 
ease ; at a place where he had already slipped down 
many a time he had clambered with a small flag between 
his teeth right to the top at the first attempt. Stones 
were still rattling down under his feet, but he was at 
the top. He stuck the flag in, it flew in the wind, he 
looked down and round about him, over his shoulder, 
too, at the crosses mouldering in the ground, nobody 
was greater than he at that place and that moment. 
By chance the teacher had come past and with a stern 
face had made K, descend. In jumping down he had 
hurt his knee and had found some difficulty in getting 
home, but still he had been on the top of the wall. 
The sense of that triumph had seemed to him then a 
victory for life, whicli was not altogether foolish, foi 
now so many years later on the arm of Barnabas in the 
snowy night the memory of it came to succour him. 

He took a finner hold, Barnabas was almost dragging 
him along, the silence was unbroken. Of the road they 
w'ere following all that K. knew was that to judge from 
its surface they liad not yet turned aside into a by-street. 
He vowed to liimself that, however difficult the way and 
however doubtful even the prospect of his being able 
to get back, he would not cease from going on. He 
\^'ould surely have strength enough to let himself be 

must come to an end some 



THE CASTLE 


45 

time. By day the Castle had looked within easy reach, 
and, of course, the messenger would take the shortest cut. 

At that moment Barnabas stopped. Where were 
they ? Was this the end ? Would Barnabas try to 
leave him ? He wouldn't succeed. K. clutched his 
arm so firmly that it almost made his hand ache. Or 
had the incredible happened, and were they already 
in the Castie or at its gates ? But they had not done 
any climbing so far as K. could tell. Or had Barnabas 
taken him up by an imperceptibly mounting road ? 
** Where are we ? " said K. in a low voice, more to 
himself than to Barnabas. ‘‘ At home," said Barnabas 
in tjie same tone. " At home? " "Be careful now, 
sir, or you'll slip. We go down here." " Down ? " 
" Only a step or two," added Barnabas, and was 
already knocking at a door. 

A girl opened it, and they were on the threshold of a 
large room almost in darkness, for there was no light 
save for a tiny oil lamp hanging over a table in the 
background. " Who is with you, Barnabas ? " asked 
the girl. " The Land Surveyor," said he. " The 
Land Surveyor," repeated the girl in a louder voice, 
turning towards the table. Two old people there rose 
to their feet, a man and a woman, as well as another 
girl. They greeted K. Barnabas introduced the whole 
family, his parents and his sisters Olga and Amalia. 
K. scarcely glanced at them and let them take his wet 
coat off to dry at the stove. 

So it was only Barnabas who was at home, not he 
himself. But why had they come here ? K. drew 
Barnabas aside and asked : " Why have you come here ? 
Or do you live in the Castle precincts ? " " The Castle 
precincts ? " repeated Barnabas, as if he did not under- 
stand. " Barnabas," said K., " you left the inn to go 



THE CASTLE 


46 

to the Castle." " No," said Barnabas, " I left it to 
come home, I don’t go to the Castle till the early 
morning, I never sleep there." Oh, said K., so 
you weren’t going to the Castle, but only here "--the 
man’s smile seemed less brilliant, and his person more 
insignificant—" Why didn’t you say so ? " " You 

didn’t ask me, sir," said Barnabas, " you only said you 
had a message to give me, but, you wouldn’t give it in 
the inn parlour, or in your room, so I thought you 
could speak to me quietly here in my parents’ house. 
The others will all leave us if you wish — and, if you 
prefer, you could spend the night here. Haven’t I done 
the right thing?" K. could not reply. It had been 
simply a misunderstanding, a common, vulgar mis- 
understanding, and K. had been completely taken in 
by it. He had been bewitched by Barnabas’s close- 
fitting, silken-gleaming jacket, which, now that it was 
unbuttoned, displayed a coarse, dirty grey shirt patched 
all over, and beneath that the huge muscular chest of a 
labourer. His surroundings not only corroborated all 
this but even emphasised it, the old gouty father who 
progressed more by the help of his groping hands than 
by the slow movements of his stiff legs, and the mother 
with her hands folded on her bosom, who was equally 
incapable of any but the smallest steps by reason of her 
stoutness. Both of them, father and mother, had been 
advancing from their corner towards K. ever since he 
had come in, and were still a long way off. The yellow- 
haired sisters, very like each other and very like Barnabas, 
but with harder features than their brother, great 
strapping wenches, hovered round their parents and 
waited for some word of greeting from K. But he could 
not utter it. He had been persuaded that in this village 
everybody meant something to him, and indeed he was 



THE CASTLE 


47 

not mistaken, it was only for these people here that he 
could feel not the slightest interest. If he had been fit 
to struggle back to the inn alone he would have left at 
once. The possibility of accompanying Barnabas to 
theYiastle early in the morning did not attract him. 
He had hoped to penetrate into the Castle unremarked 
in the night on the arm of Barnabas, but on the arm of 
the Barnabjs he had imagined, a man who was more 
to him than anyone else,* the Barnabas he had conceived 
to be far above his apparent rank and in the intimate 
confidence of the Castle. With the son of such a family, 
however, a son who integrally belonged to it, and who 
was already sitting at table with the others, a man who 
was* not even allowed to sleep in the Castle, he could 
not possibly go to the Castle in the broad light of day, 
it would be a ridiculous and hopeless undertaking. 

K. sat down on a window-seat where he determined 
to pass the night without accepting any other favour. 
The other people in the village, who turned him away 
or were afraid of him, seemed much less dangerous, for 
all that they did was to throw him back on his own 
resources, helping him to concentrate his powers, but 
such ostensible helpers as these who on the strength of 
a petty masquerade brought him into their homes 
instead of into the Castle, deflected him, whether 
intentionally or not, from his goal and only helped to 
destroy him. An invitation to join the family at table 
he ignored completely, stubbornly sitting with bent 
head on his bench. 

Then Olga, the gentler of the sisters, got up, not 
without a trace of maidenly embarrassment, came over 
to K. and asked him to join the family meal of bread 
and bacon, saying that she was going to fetch some 
beer. Where from ? ” asked K. ** From the inn,*' 



THE CASTLE 


she said. That was welcome news to K. He begged 
her instead of fetching beer to accompany him ba<^ to 
the inn, where he had important work waiting to be 
done. But the fact now emerged that she was not gj^ing 
so far as his inn, she was going to one much nearer, 
called the Herrenhof. None the less K. begged to be 
allowed to accompany her, thinking that there perhaps 
he might find a lodging for the night ; however wretched 
it might be he would prefer It to the best bed these 
people could offer him. Olga did not reply at once, 
but glanced towards the table. Her brother stood up, 
nodded obligingly, and said : ** If the gentleman 

wishes.'* This assent was almost enough to make K. 
withdraw his request, nothing could be of much v^alue 
if Barnabas assented to it. But since they were already 
wondering whether K. would be admitted into that 
inn and doubting its possibility, he insisted emphatically 
upon going, without taking the trouble to give a colour- 
able excuse for his eagerness ; this family would have 
to accept him as he was, he had no feeling of shame 
where they were concerned. Yet he was somewhat 
disturbed by Amalia’s direct and serious gaze, which 
was unflinching and perhaps a little stupid. 

On their short walk to the inn — K. had taken Olga’s 
arm and was leaning his whole weight on her as earlier 
on Barnabas, he could not get along otherwise — he 
learned that it was an inn exclusively reserved for 
gentlemen from the Castle, who took their meals there 
and sometimes slept there whenever they had business 
in the village. Olga spoke to K. in a low and con- 
fidential tone ; to walk with her was pleasant, almost as 
pleasant as walking with her brother. K. struggled against 
tlie feeling of comfort she gave him, but it persisted. 

From outside the new inn looked very like the inn 



THE CASTLE 


49 

where K. was staying. All the houses in the village 
resembled one another more or less, but still a few small 
differences were immediately apparent here ; the 
ffottt steps had a balustrade, and a fine lantern was 
fixed over the doorway. Something fluttered over 
their heads as they entered, it was a flag with the 
Count's colours. In the hall they were at once met by 
the landlord}, who was obviously on a tour of inspection ; 
he glanced at K. in passing with small eyes that were 
either screwed up critically, or half-asleep, and said : 

The Land Surveyor mustn't go anywhere but into 
the bar." " Certainly," said Olga, who took K.'s part 
at once, " he's only escorting me." But K. ungratefully 
let*go her arm and drew the landlord aside. Olga 
meanwhile waited patiently at the end of the hall. 
" I should like to spend the night here," said K. " I'm 
afraid that's impossible," said the landlord. "You 
don't seem to be aware that this house is reserved 
exclusively for gentlemen from the Castle." " Well, 
that may be the rule," said K., " but it's surely possible 
to let me sleep in a corner somewhere." " I should be 
only too glad to oblige you," said the landlord, " but 
besides the strictness with which the rule is enforced — 
and you speak about it as only a stranger could — it's 
quite out of the question for another reason ; the Castle 
gentlemen are so sensitive that I'm convinced they 
couldn't bear the sight of a stranger, at least unless they 
were prepared fot: it ; and if I were to let you sleep 
here, and by some chance or other — and chances are 
always on the side of the gentlemen — ^you were dis- 
covered, not only would it mean my ruin but yours too. 
That sounds ridiculous, but it's true." This tall and 
closely-buttoned man who stood with his legs crossed, 
one hand braced against the wall and the other on his 



THE CASTLE 


50 

hip, bending down a little towards K. and speaking 
confidentially to him, seemed to have hardly anything 
in common with the village, even although his dark 
clothes looked like a peasant's finery. “ I believe ;rou 
absolutely,'" said K., and I didn't mean to belittle 
the rule, although I expressed myself badly. Only 
there's something I'd like to point out, I have some 
influence in the Castle, and shall have still^more, and 
that secures you against any danger arising out of my 
stay here overnight, and is a guarantee that I am able 
fully to recompense any small favour you may do me." 
" Oh, I know," said the landlord, and repeated again, 
" I know all that." Now was the time for K. to state 
his wishes more clearly, but this reply of the landlord's 
disconcerted him, and so he merely asked, " Are there 
many of the Castle gentlemen staying in the house to- 
night ? " " As far as that goes, to-night is favourable," 
returned the landlord, as if in encouragement, " there's 
only one gentleman." Still K. felt incapable of urging 
the matter, but being in hopes that he was as good as 
accepted, he contented himself by asking the name of 
the gentleman. " Klamm," said the landlord casually, 
turning meanwhile to his wife who came rustling 
towards them in a remarkably shabby, old-fashioned 
gown overloaded with pleats and frills, but of a fine 
city cut. She came to summon the landlord, for the 
Chief wanted something or other. Before the landlord 
complied, however, he turned once more to K., as if it 
lay with K. to make the decision about staying all night. 
But K. could not utter a word, overwhelmed as he was 
by the discovery that it was his patron who was in the 
house. Without being able to explain it completely to 
himself he did not feel the same freedom of action in 
relation to Klamm as he did to the rest of the Castle, 



THE CASTLE 


51 

and the idea of being caught in the inn by Klamm, 
although it did not terrify him as it did the landlord, 
gave him a twinge of uneasiness, much as if he were 
thoughtlessly to hurt the feelings of someone to whom 
he was bound b)' gratitude ,* at the same time, however, 
it vexed him to recognise already in these qualms the 
obvious effects of that degradation to an inferior status 
which he had feared, and to realise that although they 
were so obvious he was not even in a position to counter- 
act them. So he stood there biting his lips and said 
nothing. Once more the landlord looked back at him 
before disappearing through a doorway, and K. re- 
turned the look without moving from the spot, until 
Olga came up and drew him away. ** What did you 
want with the landlord ? she asked. ** I wanted a 
bed for the night,*’ said K. “ But you’re staying with 
us ! ” said Olga in surprise. Of course,” said K., 
leaving her to make what she liked of it. 


m 

I N the bar, which was a large room with a vacant 
space in the middle, there were several peasants 
sitting by the wall on the tops of some casks, but they 
looked different from those in K.’s inn. They were 
more neatly and uniformly dressed in coarse yellowish- 
grey cloth, with loose jackets and tightly-fitting trousers. 
They were smallish men with at first sight a strong 
mutual resemblance, having flat bony faces, but rounded 
cheeks. They were all quiet, and sat with hardly a 
movement, except that they followed the newcomers 
with their eyes, but they did even that slowly and 



THE CASTLE 


52 

indifferently. Yet because of their numbers and their 
quietness they had a certain effect on K. He took 
Olga's arm again as if to explain his presence there. A 
man rose up from one corner, an acquaintance/'of 
Olga’s, and made towards her, but K. wheeled her 
round by the arm in another direction. His action was 
perceptible to nobody but Olga, and she tolerated it 
with a smiling side-glance. ^ ' 

The beer was drawn off by a young girl called 
Frieda. An unobtrusive little girl with fair hair, sad 
eyes, and hollow cheeks, with a striking look of conscious 
superiority. As soon as her eye met K.’s it seemed to 
him that her look decided something concerning hjm- 
self, something which he had not known to exist, but 
which her look assured him did exist. He kept on study- 
ing her from the side, even while she was speaking to 
Olga. Olga and Frieda were apparently not intimate, 
they exchanged only a few cold words. K. wanted to 
hear more, and so interposed with a question on his 
own account : ** Do you know Herr Klamm ? ” Olga 
laughed out loud. What are you laughing at ? *' asked 
K. irritably. I’m not laughing,” she protested, but 
went on laughing. ” Olga is a childish creature,” said 
K. bending far over the counter in order to attract 
Frieda’s gaze again. But she kept her eyes lowered 
and laughed shyly. ” Would you like to see Herr 
Klamm ? ” K. begged for a sight of him. She pointed 
to a door just on her left. ” There’s a little peephole 
there, you can look through.” ” What about the 
others ? ” asked K. She curled her underlip and pulled 
K. to tlie door witli a hand that was unusually soft. 
The little hole had obviously been bored for spying 
through, and commanded almost the whole of the neigh- 
bouring room. At a desk in the middle of the room 



THE CASTLE 


5 ? 

in a comfortable arm-chair sat Herr Klamm, his face 
brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung 
low before him. A middle-sized, plump, and ponderous 
main. His face was still smooth, but his cheeks were 
alrwdy somewhat flabby with age. His black mous- 
tache had long points, his eyes were hidden behind 
glittering pince-nez that sat awry. If he had been 
planted sqjiarely before his desk K. would only have 
seen his profile, but since he was turned directly towards 
K. his whole face was visible. His left elbow lay on the 
desk, his right hand, in which was a Virginia cigar, 
rested on his knee. A beer-glass was standing on the 
desk, but there was a rim round the desk which prevented 
K. “from seeing whether any papers were lying on it, 
he had the idea, however, that there were none. To 
make it certain he asked Frieda to look through the 
hole and tell him if there were any. But since she had 
been in that room a short time ago, she was able to 
inform him without further ado that the desk was empty. 
K. asked Frieda if his time was up, but she told him to 
go on looking as long as he liked. K. was now alone 
with Frieda. Olga, as a hasty glance assured him, had 
found her way to her acquaintance, and was sitting high 
on a cask swinging her legs. Frieda," said K. in a 
whisper, " do you know Herr Klamm well ? " " Oh, 

yes," she said, " very well." She leaned over to K. and 
he became aware that she was coquettishly fingering the 
low-cut cream-coloured blouse which sat oddly on her 
poor thin body. Then she said : " Didn't you notice 
how Olga laughed ? " " Yes, the rude creature," said 

K. " Well," she said cxtenuatingly, " there was a 
reason for laughing. You asked if I knew Klamm, and 
you see I " — here she involuntarily lifted her chin a 
little, and again her triumphant glance, which had no 



THE CASTLE 


54 

connection whatever with what she was saying, swept 
over K.— I am his mistress/' “ Klamm's mistress," 
said K. She nodded. " Then," said K. smiling, to 
prevent the atmosphere from being too charged with 
seriousness, " you are for me a highly respectable 
person." " Not only for you," said Frieda amiably, but 
without returning his smile. K. had a weapon for 
bringing down her pride, and he tried it : " Have you 
ever been in the Castle ? " But it missed the mark, for 
she answered : " No, but isn't it enough for me to be 
here in the bar ? " Her vanity was obviously boundless, 
and she was trying, it seemed, to get K. in particular to 
minister to it. " Of course," said K., " here in the bar 
you're taking the landlord's place." " That's so," she 
assented, " and I began as a byre-maid at the inn by 
the bridge." " With those delicate hands," said K. half- 
qucstioningly, without knowing himself whether he 
was only flattering her or was compelled by something 
in her. Her hands were certainly small and delicate, 
but they could quite as well have been called weak and 
characterless. " Nobody bothered about them then," 
she said, " and even now ..." K. looked at her 
enquiringly. She shook her head and would say no 
more. "You have your secrets, naturally," said K., 
" and you’re not likely to give them away to somebody 
you've known for only half an hour, and who hasn't 
had the chance yet to tell you anything about himself." 
This remark proved to be ill-chosen, for it seemed to 
arouse Frieda as from a trance that was favourable to 
him. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle 
she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peep- 
hole with it, and said to K. wTth an obvious attempt to 
conceal the cliangc in her attitude ; " Oh, I know all 
about you, you're the Land Surveyor," and then adding : 



THE CASTLE 


55 

but now I must go back to my work/' she returned to 
her place behind the bar counter, while a man here 
and there came up to get his empty glass refilled. K. 
waA^cd to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass 
from a stand and went up to her, saying : “ One thing 
more, Fraulein Frieda, it's an extraordinary feat and 
a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your 
way up from byre-maid ,to this position in the bar, but 
can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you ? 
An absurd idea. Your eyes — don't laugh at me, Fraulein 
Frieda — speak to me far more of conquests still to come 
than of conquests past. But the opposition one meets in 
the, world is great, and becomes greater the higher one 
aims, and it's no disgrace to accept the help of a man 
who’s fighting his way up too, even though he's a small 
and uninfluential man. Perhaps we could have a quiet 
talk together sometime, without so many onlookers ? " 

I don't know what you're after," she said, and in her 
tone this time there seemed to be, against her will, an 
echo rather of countless disappointments than of past 
triumphs. " Do you want to take me away from 
Klamm perhaps? O heavens I " and she clapped her 
hands. " You've seen through me," said K., as if 
wearied by so much mistrust, " that's exactly my real 
secret intention. You ought to leave Klamm and 
become my sweetheart. And now I can go. Olga ! " 
he cried, " we're going home." Obediently Olga slid 
down from her cask but did not succeed immediately 
in breaking through her ring of friends. Then Frieda 
said in a low voice with a hectoring look at K. ; " When 
can I talk to you ? " " Can I spend the night here ? " 
asked K. "Yes," said Frieda. " Can I stay now ? " 
“ Go out first with Olga, so that I can clear out all the 
others. Then you can come back in a little." " Right," 



THE CASTLE 


56 

said K., and he waited impatiently for Olga. But the 
peasants would not let her go ; they had made up a 
dance in which she was the central ngure, they circled 
round her yelling all together and every now and ^en 
one of them left the ring, seized Olga firmly round the 
waist and whirled her round and round ; the pace 
grew faster and faster, the yells more hungry, more 
raucous, until they were insensibly blended into one 
continuous howl. Olga, who had begun laughingly by 
trying to break out of the ring, was now merely reeling 
with flying hair from one man to the other. That's 
the kind of people Tm saddled with," said Frieda, biting 
her thin lips in scorn. " Who are they ? " asked K. 

" Klamm's servants," said Frieda, " he keeps on bring- 
ing those people with him, and they upset me. I can 
hardly tell what I've been saying to you, but please for- 
give me if I've offended you, it's these people who are 
to blame, they're the most contemptible and objection- 
able creatures I know, and I have to fill their glasses 
up with beer for them. How often I've implored Klamm 
to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up 
with the other gentlemen’s servants, he could surely 
have some consideration for me ; but it's all no use, 
an hour before his arrival they always come bursting 
in like cattle into their stalls. But now they've really 
got to get into the stalls, where they belong. If you 
weren't here I’d fling open this door and Klamm 
would be forced to drive them out himself." " Can't 
he hear them, then ? " asked K. " No," said Frieda, 
"he’s asleep." "Asleep?" cried K. "But when I 
peeped in he was awake and sitting at the desk." " He 
always sits like that," said Frieda, " he was sleeping ' 
when you saw him. Would I have let you look in if 
he hadn't been asleep ? That's how he sleeps, the 



THE CASTLE 


57 

gentlemen do sleep a great deal, it^s hard to under- 
stand, Anyhow, if he didn't sleep so much, he wouldn't 
be able to put up with his servants. But now Til have 
to tlirn them out myself." She took a whip from a corner 
and sprang among the dancers with a single bound, a 
little uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. At 
first tliey faced her as if she were merely a new partner, 
and actuall)^ for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to 
let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying : 

In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into 
the stall, all of you ! " When they saw that she was in 
earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a 
kind of panic incomprehensible to K., and under the 
impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a 
current of night air through which they all vanished 
with Frieda behind them openly driving them across 
the courtyard into the stalls. 

In the sudden silence which ensued K. heard steps 
in the vestibule. With some idea of securing his posi- 
tion he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded 
the only possible cover in the room. He had an 
admitted right to be in the bar, but since he meant to 
spend the night there he had to avoid being seen. So 
when the door was actually opened he slid under the 
counter. To be discovered there of course would have 
its dangers too, yet he could explain plausibly enough 
that he had only taken refuge from the wild licence 
of the peasants. It was the landlord who came in. 
“ Frieda ! " he called, and walked up and down the 
room several times. 

Fortunately Frieda soon came back, she did not men- 
•tion K., she only complained about the peasants, and 
in the course of looking round for K. went behind the 
counter, so that he was able to touch her foot. From 



THE CASTLE 


58 

that moment he felt safe. Since Frieda made no refer- 
ence to K., however, the landlord was compelled to do 
it. And where is the Land Surveyor ? " he asked. 
He was probably courteous by nature, refined by con- 
stant and relatively free intercourse with men who 
were much his superior, but there was remarkable 
consideration in his tone to Frieda, which was all the 
more striking because in his conversation „ he did not 
cease to be an employer addressing a servant, and a 
saucy servant at that. “ The Land Surveyor — forgot 
all about him,'* said Frieda, setting her small foot on 
K.'s chest. "He must have gone out long ago." " But 
I haven't seen him," said the landlord, " and I was in 
the hall nearly the whole time." "Well, he isn't in 
here," said Frieda coolly. " Perhaps he's hidden some- 
where," went on the landlord. " From the impression 
I had of him he's capable of a good deal." " He would 
hardly have the check to do that," said Frieda, pressing 
her foot down on K. There was a certain mirth and 
freedom about her which K. had not previously re- 
marked, and quite unexpectedly it took the upper 
hand, for suddenly laughing she bent down to K. with 
the words : " Perhaps he's hidden underneath here," 
kissed him lightly and sprang up again saying with a 
troubled air ; " No, he’s not there." Then the land- 
lord, too, surprised K. when he said : "It bothers me 
not to know for certain that he's gone. Not only be- 
cause of Herr Klamm, but because of the rule of the 
house. And the rule applies to you, Fraulein Frieda, 
just as much as to me. Well, if you answer for the bar. 
I'll go through the rest of the rooms. Good night ! 
Sleep well ! " He could hardly have left the room' 
before Frieda had turned out the electric light and 
was under the counter beside K. "My darling I My 



THE CASTLE 


59 

darling ! ** she whispered, but she did not touch him. 
As if swooning with love she lay on her back and stretched 
out her arms ; time must have seemed endless to her 
in tJie prospect of her happiness, and she sighed rather 
than sang some little song or other. Then as K. still 
lay absorbed in thought, she started up and began to 
tug at him like a child : ** Come on, it's too close down 
here," and they embraced each other, her little body 
burned in K.'s hands, in a state of unconsciousness 
which K. tried again and again but in vain to master 
as they rolled a little way, landing with a thud on 
Klamm's door, where they lay among the small puddles 
of beer and other refuse gathered on the floor. There, 
hours went past, hours in which they breathed as one, 
in which their hearts beat as one, hours in which K. 
was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself 
or wandering into a strange country, farther than ever 
man had wandered before, a country so strange that 
not even the air had anything in common with his 
native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet 
whose enchantment was such that one could only go 
on and lose oneself further. So it came to him not as a 
shock but as a faint glimmer of comfort when from 
Klamm's room a deep, authoritative impersonal voice 
called for Frieda. " Frieda," whispered K. in Frieda's 
ear, passing on the stimmons. With a mechanical 
instinct of obedience Frieda made as if to spring to her 
feet, then she remembered where she was, stretched her- 
self, laughing quietly, and said : " I'm not going, I'm 
never going to him again." K. wanted to object, to 
urge her to go to Klamm, and began to fasten up her 
•disordered blouse, but he could not bring himself to 
speak, he was too happy to have Frieda in his arms, 
too troubled also in his happiness, for it seemed to 



THE CASTLE 


6o 

him that in letting Frieda go he would lose all he had. 
And as if his support had strengthened her Frieda 
clenched her fist and beat upon the door, crying : ** Tm 
with the Land Surveyor ! That silenced Klamih at 
any rate, but K. started up, and on his knees beside 
Frieda gazed round him in the uncertain light of dawn. 
What had happened ? Where were his hopes ? What 
could he expect from Frieda now that shethad betrayed 
everything ? Instead of feeling his way with the 
prudence befitting the greatness of his enemy and of his 
ambition, he had spent a whole night wallowing in 
puddles of beer, the smell of which was nearly over- 
powering. ** What have you done ? he said as if to 
himself. '' We are both ruined.'' ‘‘ No," said Frieda, 
" it's only me that's ruined, but then I've won you. 
Don't worry. But just look how these two are 
laughing." "Who?" asked K., and turned round. 
There on the bar counter sat his two assistants, a little 
heavy-eyed for lack of sleep, but cheerful. It was a 
cheerfulness arising from a sense of duty well done. 
" What are you doing here ? " cried K. as if they were 
to blame for everything. " We had to search for you," 
explained the assistants, " since you didn't come back 
to the inn ; we looked for you at Barnabas's and finally 
found you here. We have been sitting her all night. 
Ours is no easy job." " It's in the day-time I need 
you," said K., " not in the night. Clear out," " But 
it's day-time now," said they without moving. It was 
really day, the doors into the courtyard were opened, 
the peasants came streaming in and with them Olga, 
whom K. had completely forgotten. Although her 
hair and clothes were in disorder Olga was as aleiir 
as on the previous evening, and her eyes flew to K. 
before she was well over the threshold. " Why did you 



THE CASTLE 


6l 


not come home with me ? " she asked, almost weep- 
ing. All for a creature like that I " she said then, 
and repeated the remark several times. Frieda, who 
had Vanished for a moment, came back with a small 
bundle of clothing, and Olga moved sadly to one side. 

Now we can be off," said Frieda, it was obvious she 
meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. 
K. walked with Frieda, and behind them the assist- 
ants ; that was the little procession. The peasants 
displayed a great contempt for Frieda, which was 
understandable, for she had lorded it over them hitherto ,* 
one of them even took a stick and held it as if to prevent 
her from going out until she had jumped over it, but a 
look from her sufficed to quell him. When they were 
out in the snow K. breathed a little more freely. It was 
such a relief to be in the open air that the journey seemed 
less laborious ; if he had been alone he would have got 
on still better. When he reached the inn he went 
straight to his room and lay down on the bed. Frieda 
prepared a couch for herself on the floor beside him. 
The assistants had pushed their way in too, and on 
being driven out came back through the window. K. 
was too weary to drive them out again. The land- 
lady came up specially to welcome Frieda, who hailed 
her as mother " ; their meeting was inexplicably 
affectionate, with kisses and long embracings. There 
was little peace and quietness to be had in the room, 
for the maids too came clumping in with their heavy 
boots, bringing or seeking various articles, and when- 
ever they wanted anything from the miscellaneous 
assortment on the bed they simply pulled it out from 
“under K. They greeted Frieda as one of themselves, 
in spite of all this coming and going K. stayed in bed 
the whole day through, and the whole night. Frieda 



THE CASTLE 


62 

performed little offices for him. When he got up at 
last on the following morning he was much refreshed, 
and it was the fourth day since his arrival in the village. 


IV 

H e would have liked an intimate talk with Frieda, 
but the assistants hindered this simply by their 
importunate presence, and Frieda, too, laughed and 
joked with them from time to time. Otherwise they 
were not at all exacting, they had simply settled ^own 
in a corner on two old skirts spread out on the floor. 
They made it a point of honour, as they repeatedly 
assured Frieda, not to disturb the Land Surveyor and 
to take up as little room as possible, and in pursuit of 
this intention, although with a good deal of whispering 
and giggling, they kept on trying to squeeze themselves 
into a smaller compass, crouching together in the corner 
so that in the dim light they looked like one large 
bundle. From his experience of them by daylight, 
however, K. was all too conscious that they were acute 
observers and never took their eyes off him, whether 
they were fooling like children and using their hands as 
spyglasses, or merely glancing at him while apparently 
completely absorbed in grooming their beards, on which 
they spent much thought and which they were for ever 
comparing in length and thickness, calling on Frieda to 
decide between them. From his bed K. often watched 
the antics of all three with the completest indifference. 

When he felt himself well enough to leave his bed, 
they all ran to serve him. He was not yet strong 
enough to ward off their services, and noted that that 



THE CASTLE 


63 

brought him into a state of dependence on them which 
might have evil consequences, but he could not help it. 
Nor was it really unpleasant to drink at the table the 
good coffee which Frieda had brought, to warm him- 
self at the stove which Frieda had lit, and to have the 
assistants racing ten times up and down the stairs in 
their awkwardness and zeal to fetch him soap and 
water, comb, and looking-glass, and eventually even a 
small glass of rum becausd he had hinted in a low voice 
at his desire for one. 

Among all this giving of orders and being waited on, 
K. said, more out of good humour than any hope of 
beings obeyed : ** Go away now, you two, I need nothing 
more for the present, and I want to speak to Fraulein 
Frieda by herself.^' And when he saw no direct op- 
position on their faces he added* by way of excusing 
them : We three shall go to tk ’llage Superintendent 
afterwards, so wait downstairs the bar for me.'* 
Strangely enough they obeyed him, only turning to 
say before going ; ‘‘We could wait here," But K. 
answered : ‘‘I know, but I don't want you to wait here." 

It annoyed him, however, and yet in a sense pleased 
him when Frieda, who had settled on his knee as soon 
as the assistants were gone, said ; ‘‘ What's your 
objection to the assistants, darling ? We don't need to 
have any mysteries before them. They are true friends." 
“ Oh, true friends," said K., ‘‘ they keep spying on 
me the whole time, it's nonsensical but abominable." 
" I believe I know what you mean," she said, and she 
clung to his neck and tried to say something else but 
could not go on speaking, and since their chair was 
^:lose to it they reeled over and fell on the bed. There 
they lay, but not in the forgetfulness of the previous 
night. She was seeking and he was seeking, they raged 



THE CASTLE 


64 

and contorted their faces and bored their heads into 
each other's bosoms in the urgency of seeking something, 
and their embraces and their tossing limbs did not avail 
to make them forget, but only reminded them of what 
they sought ; like dogs desperately tearing up the 
ground they tore at each other's bodies, and often, 
helplessly baffled, in a final effort to attain happiness 
they nuzzled and tongued each other's , face. Sheer 
weariness stilled them at last ahd brought them gratitude 
to each other. Then the maids came in. “ Look how 
they're lying there," said one, and sympathetically cast 
a coverlet over them. 

When somewhat later K. freed himself from the 
coverlet and looked round, the two assistants — and he 
was not surprised at that — ^were again in their corner, 
and with a finger jerked towards K. nudged each other 
to a formal salute, but besides them the landlady was 
sitting near the bed knitting away at a stocking, an 
infinitesimal piece of work hardly suited to her enormous 
bulk which almost darkened the room. " I've been 
here a long time," she said, lifting up her broad and 
much furrowed face which was, however, still rounded 
and might once have been beautiful. The words sounded 
like a reproach, an ill-timed reproach, for K. had not 
desired her to come. So he merely acknowledged them 
by a nod, and sat up. Frieda also got up, but left K. to 
lean over the landlady's chair, " If you want to speak 
to me,'’ said K. in bewilderment, " couldn't you put it off 
until after I come back from visiting the Superintendent ? 
1 have important business with him." " This is im- 
portant, believe me, sir," said the landlady, " your other 
business is probably only a question of work, but this* 
concerns a living person, Frieda, my dear maid." " Oh, 
if that's it," said K., " then of course you're right, but 



THE CASTLE 


65 

I don't see why we can't be left to settle our own affairs." 

Because I love her and care for her," said the land- 
lady, drawing Frieda's head towards her, for Frieda as 
she 'stood only reached up to the landlady's shoulder. 
“ Since Frieda puts such confidence in you," cried K., 
“ I must do the same, and since not long ago Frieda 
called my assistants true friends we are all friends 
together. I can tell you that what I would like best 
would be for Frieda and myself to get married, the 
sooner the better. I know, oh, I know that I'll never 
be able to make up to Frieda for all she has lost for my 
sake, her position in the Herrenhof and her friendship 
with Klarnm." Frieda lifted up her face, her eyes were 
full of tears and had not a trace of triumph. " Why ? 
Why am I chosen out from other people ? " " What ? " 
asked K. and the landlady simultaneously. " She's 
upset, poor child," said the landlady, " upset by the 
conjunction of too much happiness and unhappiness." 
And as if in confirmation of those words Frieda now 
flung herself upon K., kissing him wildly as if there were 
nobody else in the room, and then weeping, but still 
clinging to him, fell on her knees before him. While he 
caressed Frieda's hair with both hands K. asked the 
landlady ; "You seem to have no objection ? " "You 
are a man of honour," said the landlady, who also 
liad tears in her eyes. She looked a little worn and 
breathed with difficulty, but she found strength enough 
to say ; " There's only the question now of what 

guarantees you are to give Frieda, for great as is my 
respect for you, you're a stranger here ; there's nobody 
here who can speak for you, your family circumstances 
•aren't known here, so some guarantee is necessary. You 
must see that, my dear sir, and indeed you touched on 
it yourself when you mentioned how much Frieda must 
3 



66 


THE CASTLE 


lose through her association with you." " Of course, 
guarantees, most certainly," said K., " but they’ll be 
best given before the notary, and at the same time 
other officials of the Count’s will perhaps be concerned. 
Besides, before I'm married there’s something I must 
do. I must have a talk with Klamm." " That’s im- 
possible," said Frieda, raising herself a little and pressing 
close to K., " what an idea ! " " But it myst be done," 
said K., " if it’s impossible for me to manage it, you 
must." " I can’t, K. ; I can’t," said Frieda. " Klamm 
will never talk to you. How can you even think of 
such a thing ! " " And won't he talk to you ? " asked 
K, " Not to me either," said Frieda, " neither to you 
nor to me, it’s simply impossible." She turned to the 
landlady with outstretched arms ; "You see what he’s 
asking for ! " " You’re a strange person," said the 

landlady, and she was an awe-inspiring figure now that 
she sat more upright, her legs spread out and her 
enormous knees projecting under her thin skirt, " you 
ask for the imp)Ossible. " "Why is it impossible?" 
said K. " That’s what I’m going to tell you," said the 
landlady in a tone which sounded as if her explanation 
were less a final concession to friendship than the first 
item in a score of penalties she was enumerating, " that’s 
what I shall be glad to let you know. Although I don’t 
belong to the Castle, and am only a woman, only a 
landlady here in an inn of the lowest kind — it’s not of 
the very lowest but not far from it — and on that 
account you may not perhaps set much store by my 
explanation, still I’ve kept my eyes open all my life 
and met many kinds of people and taken the whole 
burden of the inn on my own shoulders, for Martin is 
no landlord although he’s a good man, and responsi- 
bility is a tiling he’ll never understand. It’s only his 



THE CASTLE 


67 

carelessness, for instance, that youVe got to thank — 
for I was tired to death on that evening — for being here 
in the village at all, for sitting here on this bed in peace 
and comfort." " What ? " said K., waking from a kind 
of absent-minded distraction, pricked more by curiosity 
than by anger. " It's only his carelessness you've got 
to thank for it," cried the landlady again, pointing with 
her forefinger at K. Frieda tried to silence her. " I 
can't help it," said the landlady with a swift turn of her 
whole body. " The Land Surveyor asked me a question 
and I must answer it. There's no other way of making 
him understand what we take for granted, that Herr 
Klamm will never speak to him — will never speak, did 
1 say ? — can never speak to him. Just listen to me, sir. 
Herr Klamm is a gentleman from the Castle, and that in 
itself, without considering Klamm's position there at 
all, means that he is of very high rank. But what are 
you, for whose marriage we are humbly considering 
here ways and means of getting permission ? You are 
not from the Castle, you are not from the village, you 
aren't anything. Or rather, unfortunately, you are 
something, a stranger, a man who isn't wanted and 
is in everybody's way, a man who's always causing 
trouble, a man who takes up the maids' room, a man 
whose intentions are obscure, a man who has ruined 
our dear little Frieda and whom we must unfortunately 
accept as her husband. I don't hold all that up against 
you. You are what you are, and I have seen enough in 
my lifetime to be able to face facts. But now consider 
what it is you ask. A man like Klamm is to talk with 
you. It vexed me to hear that Frieda let you look 
through the peephole, when she did that she was already 
corrupted by you. But just tell me, how did you have 
the face to look at Klamm ? You needn't answer, I 



THE CASTLE 


68 

know you think you were quite equal to the occasion. 
You’re not even capable of seeing Klamm as he really 
is, that’s not merely an exaggeration, for I myself am 
not capable of it either. Klamm is to talk to you, and 
yet Klamm doesn’t talk even to people from the village, 
never yet has he spoken a word himself to anyone in 
the village. It was Frieda’s great distinction, a dis- 
tinction I’ll be proud of to my dying day„wthat he used 
at least to call out her name, and that she could speak 
to him whenever she liked and was permitted the 
freedom of the peephole, but even to her he never 
talked. And the fact that he called her name didn’t 
mean of necessity what one might think, he simply 
mentioned the name Frieda — ^who can tell what he was 
thinking of ? — and that Frieda naturally came to him 
at once was her affair, and that she was admitted 
without let or hindrance was an act of grace on Klamm’s 
part, but that he deliberately summoned her is more 
than one can maintain. Of course that’s all over 
now for good. Klamm may perhaps call * Frieda ’ as 
before, that’s possible, but she’ll never again be ad- 
mitted to his presence, a girl who has thrown herself 
away upon you. And there’s just one thing, one thing 
my poor head can’t understand, that a girl who had the 
honour of being known as Klamm’s mistress — a wild 
exaggeration in my opinion — should have allowed you 
even to lay a finger on her.” 

” Most certainly, that’s remarkable,” said K., drawing 
Frieda to his bosom — she submitted at once although 
with bent head — ” but in my opinion that only proves 
the possibility of your being mistaken in some respects. 
You re quite right, for instance, in saying that I’m a' 
mere notliing compared with Klamm, and even though 
I insist on speaking to Klamm in spite of that, and am 



THE CASTLE 


69 

not dissuaded even by your arguments, that does not 
mean at all that Tm able to face Klamm without a door 
between us, or that I mayn't run from the room at the 
very sight of him. But such a conjecture, even though 
well founded, is no valid reason in my eyes for refraining 
from the attempt. If I only succeed in holding my 
ground there's no need for him to speak to me at all, it 
will be sufficient for m^ to see what effect my words 
have on him, and if they have no effect or if he simply 
ignores them, I shall at any rate have the satisfaction 
of having spoken my mind freely to a great man. But 
you, with your wide knowledge of men and affairs, 
and .Frieda, who was only yesterday Klamm's mistress 
— I see no reason for questioning that title — could 
certainly procure me an interview with Klamm quite 
easily ; if it could be done in no other way I could 
surely see him in the Herrenhof, perhaps he's still there." 

" It's impossible," said the landlady, " and I can see 
that you're incapable of understanding why. But just 
tell me what you want to speak to Klamm about ? 

" About Frieda, of course," said K. 

" About Frieda ? " repeated the landlady incom- 
prehendingly, and turned to Frieda. " Do you hear 
that, Frieda, it's about you that he, he, wants to speak 
to Klamm, to Klamm I " 

" Oh," said K., " you're a clever and admirable 
woman, and yet every trifle upsets you. Well, there it 
is, I want to speak to him about Frieda ; that's not 
monstrous, it's only natural. And you're quite wrong, 
too, in supposing that from the moment of my appear- 
ance Frieda has ceased to be of any importance to 
Klamm. You underestimate him if you suppose that. 
I'm well aware that it's impertinence in me to lay down 
the law to you in this matter, but I must do it. I can't 



THE CASTLE 


70 

be the cause of any alteration in Klamm's relation to 
Frieda. Either there was no essential relationship 
between them— and that's what it amounts to if people 
deny that he was her honoured lover — in which case 
there is still no relationship between them, or else there 
was a relationship, and then how could I, a cipher in 
Klamm's eyes, as you rightly point out, how could I 
make any difference to it ? One flies to such supposi- 
tions in the first moment of alarm, but the smallest 
reflection must correct one's bias. Anyhow, let us 
hear what Frieda herself thinks about it." 

With a far-away look in her eyes and her cheek on 
K.'s breast, Frieda said : " It's certain, as mother says, 
that Klamm will have nothing more to do with me. 
But I agree that it's not because of you, darling, nothing 
of that kind could upset him. I think on the other hand 
that it was entirely his work that we found each other 
under the bar counter, we should bless that hour and 
not curse it." 

" If that is so," said K. slowly, for Frieda's words 
were sweet, and he shut his eyes a moment or two to 
let their sweetness penetrate him, " if that is so, there 
is less ground than ever to flinch from an interview with 
Klamm." 

" Upon my word," said the landlady, with her nose 
in the air, you put me in mind of my own husband, 
you're just as childish and obstinate as he is. You've 
been only a few days in the village and already you 
think you know everything better than people who have 
spent their lives here, better than an old woman like 
me, and better than Frieda who has seen and heard 
so much in the Merrenhof. I don't deny that it's' 
possible once in a while to achieve something in the 
teeth of every rule and tradition. I've never experi- 



THE CASTLE 


71 

cnced anything of that kind myself, but I believe there 
are precedents for it. That may well be, but it cer- 
tairily doesn't happen in the way you're trying to do it, 
simply by saying * no, no,' and sticking to your own 
opinions and flouting the most well-meant advice. Do 
you think it’s you I'm anxious about ? Did I bother 
about you in the least so long as you were by yourself ? 
Even though it would jiave been a good thing and 
saved a lot of trouble ? The only thing I ever said to 
my husband about you was : ' Keep your distance 

where he's concerned.' And I should have done that 
myself to this very day if Frieda hadn't got mixed up 
with, your affairs. It's her you have to thank — whether 
you like it or not — for my interest in you, even for my 
noticing your existence at all. And you can’t simply 
shake me off, for I'm the only person who looks after 
little Frieda, and you're strictly answerable to me. 
Maybe Frieda is right, and all that has happened is 
Klamm's will, but I have nothing to do with Klamm 
here and now. I shall never speak to him, he's quite 
beyond my reach. But you're sitting here, keeping my 
Frieda, and being kept yourself — I don't see why I 
shouldn’t tell you — by me. Yes, by me, young man, 
for let me see you find a lodging anywhere in this 
\ illage if I throw you out, even it were only in a dog- 
kennel." 

" Thank you," said K., " that's frank and I believe 
you absolutely. So my position is as uncertain as that, 
is it, and Frieda’s position, too ? " 

" No ! " interrupted the landlady furiously. " Frieda's 
position in this respect has nothing at all to do with 
*yours. Frieda belongs to my house, and nobody is 
entitled to call her position here uncertain.” 

" All right, all right," said K., " I'll grant you that. 



THE CASTLE 


72 

too, especially since Frieda for some reason I'm not 
able to fathom seems to be too afraid of you to interrupt. 
Stick to me then for the present. My position is quite 
uncertain, you don't deny that, indeed you rather go 
out of your way to emphasise it. Like everything else 
you say, that has a fair proposition of truth in it, but it 
isn't absolutely true. For instance, I know where I 
could get a very good bed if I, wanted it." 

" Where? Where? " cried Frieda and the landlady 
simultaneously and so eagerly that they might have had 
the same motive for asking. 

" At Barnabas's," said K. 

" That scum ! " cried the landlady. " That rascally 
scum ! At Barnabas's ! Do you hear — " and she 
turned towards the corner, but the assistants had long 
quitted it and were now standing arm-in-arm behind 
her. And so now, as if she needed support, she seized 
one of them by the hand : " Do you hear where the man 
goes hob-nobbing, with the family of Barnabas ? Oh, 
certainly he'd get a bed there ; I only wished he'd 
stay'd there overnight instead of in the Herrenhof. But 
where were you two ? " 

" Madam," said K., before the assistants had time 
to answer, " these are my assistants. But you're 
treating them as if they were your assistants and my 
keepers. In every other respect I'm willing at least 
to argue the point with you courteously, but not where 
my assistants are concerned, that's too obvious a matter. 
I request you therefore not to speak to my assistants, 
and if my request proves ineffective I shall forbid my 
assistants to answer you." 

" So I'm not allowed to speak to you," said the land- 
lady, and they laughed all three, the landlady scornfully, 
but with less anger than K. had expected, and the 



THE CASTLE 


73 

assistants in their usual manner, which meant both much 
and little and disclaimed all responsibility. 

Don't get angry," said Frieda, " you must try to 
understand why we're upset. I can put it in this way, 
it's all owing to Barnabas that we belong to each other 
now. When I saw you for the first time in the bar — 
when you came in arm-in-arm with Olga — well, I knew 
something about you, bi^t I was quite indifferent to 
you. I was indifferent not only to you but to nearly 
everything, yes, nearly everything. For at that time I 
was discontented about lots of things, and often annoyed, 
but it was a queer discontent and a queer annoyance. 
For instance, if one of the customers in the bar insulted 
me — and they were always after me — you saw what 
kind of creatures they were, but there were many worse 
than that, Klamm's servants weren't the worst — well, 
if one of them insulted me, what did that matter to me ? 
I regarded it as if it had happened years before, or as if it 
had happened to someone else, or as if I had only heard 
tell of it, or as if I had already forgotten about it. But 
1 can't describe it, I can hardly imagine it now, so 
different has everything become since losing Klamm." 

And Frieda broke off short, letting her head drop 
sadly, folding her hands on her bosom. 

" You see," cried the landlady, and she spoke not as 
if in her own person but as if she had merely lent Frieda 
her voice ; she moved nearer, too, and sat close beside 
Frieda, " you see, sir, the results of your actions, ana 
your assistants too, whom I am not allowed to speak to, 
can profit by looking on at them. You've snatched 
Frieda from the happiest state she had ever known, and 
*you managed to do that largely because in her childish 
susceptibility she could not bear to see you arm-in-arm 
with Olga, and so apparently delivered hand and foot 



THE CASTLE 


74 

to the Barnabas family. She rescued you from that 
and sacrificed herself in doing so. And now that it's 
done, and Frieda has given up all she had for,, the 
pleasure of sitting on your knee, you come out with 
this fine trump card that once you had the chance of 
getting a bed from Barnabas. That's by way of show- 
ing me that you're independent of me. I assure you, 
if you had slept in that hotjse you would be so inde- 
pendent of me that in the twinkling of an eye you would 
be put out of this one." 

" I don't know what sins the family of Barnabas have 
committed," said K., carefully raising Frieda — who 
drooped as if lifeless — setting her slowly down on the 
bed and standing up himself, " you may be right about 
them, but I know that I was right in asking you to leave 
Frieda and me to settle our own affairs. You talked then 
about your care and affection, yet I haven't seen much 
of that, but a great deal of hatred and scorn and for- 
bidding me your house. If it was your intention to 
separate Frieda from me or me from Frieda it was quite 
a good move, but all the same I think it won't succeed, 
and if it does succeed — it's my turn now to issue vague 
threats— you'll repent it. As for the lodging you favour 
me with — you can only mean this abominable hole — 
it’s not at all certain that you do it of your own free will, 
it’s much more likely that the authorities insist upon it. 
I shall now inform them that I have been told to go — 
and if I am allotted other quarters you'll probably feci 
relieved, but not so much as I will myself. And now 
I'm going to discuss this and other business with the 
Superintendent, please be so good as to look after 
Frieda at least, whom you have reduced to a bad enough 
state w'ith your so-called motherly counsel." 

Then he turned to the assistants. " Come along," 



THE CASTLE 


75 

he said, taking Klamm's letter from its nail and making 
for the door. The landlady looked at him in silence, 
and />nly when his hand was on the latch did she say : 

There's something else to take away with you, for 
whatever you say and however you insult an old woman 
like me, you're after all Frieda's future husband. That's 
my sole reason for telling you now that your ignorance 
of the local situation is so appalling that it makes my 
head go round to listen to you and compare your ideas 
and opinions with the real state of things. It's a kind 
of ignorance which can't be enlightened at one attempt, 
and perhaps never can be, but there's a lot you could 
learn jf you would only believe me a little and keep 
your own ignorance constantly in mind. For instance, 
you would at once be less unjust to me, and you would 
begin to have an inkling of the shock it was to me — a 
shock from which I'm still suffering — when I realised 
that my dear little Frieda had, so to speak, deserted the 
eagle for the snake in the grass, only the real situation 
is much worse even than that, and I have to keep on 
tr)dng to forget it so as to be able to speak civilly to 
you at all. Oh, now you're angry again ! No, don't 
go away yet, listen to this one appeal ; wherever you 
may be, never forget that you’re the most ignorant 
person in the village, and be cautious ; here in this 
house where Frieda's presence saves you from harm 
you can drivel on to your heart’s content, for instance, 
here you can explain to us how you mean to get an 
interview with Klamm, but I entreat you, I entreat you, 
don't do it in earnest." 

She stood up, tottering a little with agitation, went 
ftver to K., took his hand and looked at him imploringly. 
'Madam," said K., "I don't understand why you 
should stoop to entreat me about a thing like this. If 



THE CASTLE 


76 

as you say, it's impossible for me to speak to Klamm, 
I won't manage it in any case whether I'm entreated or 
not. But if it proves to be possible, why shouldn't I do 
it, especially as that would remove your main objection 
and so make your other premises questionable. Of 
course I'm ignorant, that's an unshaken truth and a 
sad truth for me, but it gives me all the advantage of 
ignorance, which is greater^ daring, and so I'm pre- 
pared to put up with my ignorance, evil consequences 
and all, for some time to come, so long as my strength 
holds out. But these consequences really affect nobody 
but myself, and that's why I simply can't understand 
your pleading. I'm certain you would always look after 
Frieda, and if I were to vanish from Frieda's ken you 
couldn't regard that as anything but good luck. So 
what are you afraid of? Surely you're not afraid — an 
ignorant man thinks everything possible " — here K. 
flung the door open — ** surely you're not afraid for 
Klamm ? " The landlady gazed after him in silence as he 
ran down the staircase with the assistants following him. 


V 

T O his own surprise K. had little difficulty in obtain- 
ing an interview with the Superintendent. He 
sought to explain this to himself by the fact that, going 
by his experience hitherto, official intercourse with the 
authorities for him was always very easy. This was 
caused on the one hand by the fact that the word 
had obviously gone out once and for all to treat his 
case wdth the external marks of indulgence, and on the 
other, by the admirable autonomy of the service, which 



THE CASTLE 


77 

one divined to be peculiarly effective precisely where 
it was not visibly present. At the mere thought of 
thofe facts, K. was often in danger of considering his 
situation hopeful ; nevertheless, after such fits of easy 
confidence, he would hasten to tell himself that just 
there lay his danger. 

Direct intercourse with the authorities was not 
particularly difficult then, for well organised as they 
might be, all they did was to guard the distant and 
invisible interests of distant and invisible masters, while 
K. fought for something vitally near to him, for himself, 
and moreover, at least at the very beginning, on his 
own ^initiative, for he was the attacker ; and besides 
he fought not only for himself, but clearly for other 
powers as well which he did not know, but in which, 
without infringing the regulations of the authorities, 
he was permitted to believe. But now by the fact that 
they had at once amply met his wishes in all unim- 
portant matters — and hitherto only unimportant 
matters had come up — they had robbed him of the 
possibility of light and easy victories, and with that 
of the satisfaction which must accompany them and 
the well-grounded confidence for further and greater 
struggles which must result from them. Instead, they 
let K. go anywhere he liked — of course only within 
the village — ^and thus pampered and enervated him, 
ruled out all possibility of conflict, and transposed him 
to an unofficial, totally unrecognised, troubled, and 
alien existence. In this life it might easily happen, if 
he were not always on his guard, that one day or other, 
in spite of the amiability of the authorities and the 
* scrupulous fulfilment of all his exaggeratedly light 
duties, he might — deceived by the apparent favour 
shown him — conduct himself so imprudently that he 



THE CASTLE 


78 

might get a fall ; and the authorities, still ever mild 
and friendly, and as it were against their will, but in 
the name of some public regulation unknown to hjim, 
might have to come and clear him out of the way. 
And what was it, this other life to which he was con- 
signed ? Never yet had K. seen vocation and life so 
interlaced as here, so interlaced that sometimes one 
might think that they had exchanged places. What 
importance, for example, had the power, merely formal 
up till now, which Klamm exercised over K.'s services, 
compared with the very real power which Klamm 
possessed in K.’s bedroom ? So it came about that while 
a light and frivolous bearing, a certain deliberate .care- 
lessness was sufficient when one came in direct contact 
with the authorities, one needed in everything else the 
greatest caution, and had to look round on every side 
before one made a single step. 

K. soon found his opinion of the authorities of the 
place confirmed when he went to see the Superintendent. 
The Superintendent, a kindly, stout, clean-shaven man, 
was laid up ; he was suffering from a severe attack of 
gout, and received K. in bed. “ So here is our Land 
Surveyor,*' he said, and tried to sit up, failed in the 
attempt and flung himself back again on the cushions, 
pointing apologetically to his leg. In the faint light of 
the room, where the tiny windows were still further 
darkened by curtains, a noiseless, almost shadowing 
woman pushed forward a chair for K. and placed it 
beside the bed. Take a seat. Land Surveyor, take a 
seat," said the Superintendent, " and let me know your 
wishes." K. read out Klamm's letter and adjoined a 
few remarks to it. Again he had this sense of extra- ' 
ordinary ease in intercourse with the authorities. They 
seemed literally to bear every burden, one could lay 



THE CASTLE 


79 

everything on their shoulders and remain free and 
untouched oneself. As if he, too, felt this in his way, 
the Superintendent made a movement of discomfort 
on ihe bed. At length he said : “I know about the 
whole business as, indeed, you have remarked. The 
reason why Tve done nothing is, firstly, that Tve been 
unwell, and secondly, that you’ve been so long in coming ; 
I thought finally that you had given up the business. 
But now that you’ve been ^o kind as to look me up, really 
I must tell you the plain unvarnished truth of the matter. 
You’ve been taken on as Land Surveyor, as you say, 
but, unfortunately, we have no need of a Land Sur- 
veyor. There wouldn’t be the least use for one here. 
The frontiers of our little state are marked out and all 
officially recorded. So what should we do with a Land 
Surveyor ) ” Though he had not given the matter a 
moment’s thought before, K. was convinced now at 
the bottom of his heart that he had expected some such 
response as this. Exactly for that reason he was able 
to reply immediately : ” This is a great surprise for me. 
It throws all my calculations out. I can only hope that 
there’s some misunderstanding.” ” No, unfortunately,” 
said the Superintendent, ” it’s as I've said.” ” But 
how is that possible ? ” cried K. ” Surely I haven’t 
made this endless journey just to be sent back again.” 
” That’s another question,” replied the Superintendent, 
” which isn’t for me to decide, but how this misunder- 
standing became possible, I can certainly explain that. 
In such a large governmental office as the Count’s, it 
may occasionally happen that one department ordains 
this, another that ; neither knows of the other, and 
•though the supreme control is absolutely efficient, it 
comes by its nature too late, and so every now and 
then a trifling miscalculation arises. Of course that 



8o 


THE CASTLE 


applies only to the pettiest little affairs, as for example 
your case. In great matters I've never known of any 
error yet, but even little affairs are often painful enough. 
Now as for your case, I'll be open with you about its 
history, and make no official mystery of it — ^I'm not 
enough of the official for that. I'm a farmer and always 
will remain one. A long time ago — I had only been 
Superintendent for a few months — there cape an order, 

I can't remember from whafe department, in which 
in the usual categorical way of the gentlemen up there, 
it was made known that a Land Surveyor was to be 
called in, and the municipality were instructed to hold 
themselves ready for the plans and measurements 
necessary for his work. This order obviously couldn't 
have concerned you, for it was many years ago, and 
I shouldn't have remembered it if I weren't ill just now 
and with ample time in bed to think of the most absurd 
things — Mizzi," he said, suddenly interrupting his 
narrative, to the woman who was still flitting about the 
room in incomprehensible activity, please have a look 
in the cabinet, perhaps you'll find the order." "You 
sec, it belongs to my first months here," he explained to 
K., " at that time I still filed everything away." The 
woman opened the cabinet at once. K. and the Super- 
intendent looked on. The cabinet was crammed full of 
papers. When it was opened two large packages of 
papers rolled out, tied in round bundles, as one usually 
binds firewood ; the woman sprang back in alarm. 

" It must be down below, at the bottom," said the 
Superintendent, directing operations from the bed. 
Gathering the papers in both arms the woman obediently 
threw them all out of the cabinet so as to read those at • 
the bottom. The papers now covered half the floor. 

" A great deal of work is got through here," said the 



THE CASTLE 


8l 


Superintendent nodding his head, “ and that's only a 
small fraction of it. Tve put, away the most important 
pile in the shed, but the great mass of it has simply gone 
astray. Who could keep it all together? But there's 
piles and piles more in the shed." " Will you be able 
to find the order ? " he said, turning again to his wife ; 
“ you must look for a document with the word Land 
Surveyor uixlerlined in blue pencil." " It's too dark," 
said the woman, " I'll fotch a candle," and she stamped 
through the papers to the door. " My wife is a great 
help to me," said the Superintendent, " in these difficult 
official affairs, and yet we can never quite keep up with 
them. True, I have another assistant for the writing 
that* has to be done, the teacher ; but all the same it's 
impossible to get things shipshape, there's always a 
lot of business that has to be left lying, it has been put 
away in that chest there," and he pointed to another 
cabinet. " And just now, when I'm laid up, it has got 
the upper hand," he said, and lay back with a weary yet 
proud air. " Couldn't I," asked K., seeing that the 
woman had now returned with the candle and was 
kneeling before the chest looking for the paper, " couldn't 
I help your wife to look for it ? " The Superintendent 
smilingly shook his head : " As I said before, I don't 
want to make any parade of official secrecy before you, 
but to let you look through these papers yourself — no, 
I can't go so far as that." Now stillness fell in the room, 
only the rustling of the papers was to be heard ; it 
looked, indeed, for a few minutes, as if the Super- 
intendent were dozing. A faint rapping on the door 
made K. turn round. It was of course the assistants. 
All the same they showed already some of the effects of 
their training, they did not rush at once into the room, 
but whispered at first through the door which was 



82 


THE CASTLE 


slightly ajar : " It's cold out here." " Who's that ? " 
asked the Superintendent, starting up. It's only my 
assistants," replied K. " I don't know where to ask 
them to wait for me, it’s too cold outside and here they 
would be in the way." " They won't disturb me,” said 
the Superintendent indulgently. " Ask them to come 
in. Besides I know them. Old acquaintances." " But 
they're in my way,” K. replied bluntly, letting his gaze 
wander from the assistants to #4:he Superinfendent and 
back again, and finding on the faces of all three the 
same smile. " But seeing you're here as it is,” he went 
on experimentally, " stay and help the Superintendent's 
lady there to look for a document with the word Land 
Surveyor underlined in blue pencil.” The Superin- 
tendent raised no objection. What had not been per- 
mitted to K. was allowed to the assistants ; they threw 
themselves at once on the papers, but they did not so 
much seek for anything as rummage about in the heap, 
and while one was spelling out a document the other 
would immediately snatch it out of his hand. The 
woman meanwhile knelt before the empty chest, she 
seemed to have completely given up looking, in any 
case the candle was standing quite far away from her. 

” The assistants,” said the Superintendent with a 
self-complacent smile, which seemed to indicate that 
he had the lead, though nobody was in a position even to 
assume this, ” they're in your way then ? Yet they're 
your own assistants.” ” No,” replied K. coolly, " they 
only ran into me here,” " Ran into you,” said he ; 
" you mean, of course, were assigned to you.” " All 
right then, were assigned to me,” said K., " but they 
might as well have fallen from the sky, for all the 
thought that was spent in choosing them.” " Nothing 
here is done without taking thought,” said the Super- 



THE CASTLE 


8 ? 

intendent, actually forgetting the pain in his foot and 
sitting up. Nothing ! ** said K., " and what about 
my being summoned here then ? " '' Even your being 

summoned was carefully considered," said the Super- 
intendent ; "it was only certain auxiliary circum- 
stances that entered and confused the matter, Til prove 
it to you from the official papers." " The papers will 
not be fouad," said K. " Not be found? " said the 
Superintendent. " Mizzi, please hurry up a bit ! Still 
I can tell you the story even without the papers. We 
replied with thanks to the order that Tve mentioned 
already, saying that we didn't need a Land Surveyor. 
But; this reply doesn't appear to have reached the 
original department — I'll call it A — but by mistake went 
to another department, B. So Department A remained 
without an answer, but unfortunately our full reply didn't 
reach B either ; whether it was that the order itself was 
not enclosed by us, or whether it got lost on the way — 
it was certainly not lost in my department, that I can 
vouch for — in any case all that arrived at Department 
B was the covering letter, in which was merely noted 
that the enclosed order, unfortunately an impracticable 
one, was concerned with the engagement of a Land 
Surveyor. Meanwhile Department A was waiting for 
our answer, they had, of course, made a memorandum 
of the case, but as excusably enough often happens and 
is bound to happen even under the most efficient 
handling, our correspondent trusted to the fact that 
we would answer him, after which he would either 
summon the Land Surveyor, or else if need be write 
us further about the matter. As a result he never 
thought of referring to his memorandum and the whole 
thing fell into oblivion. But in Department B the 
covering letter came into the hands of a correpondent. 



THE CASTLE 


84 

tamed for his conscientiousness, Sordini hy name* an 
Italian ; it is incomprehensible even to me, though 
I am one of the initiated, why a man of his capacities 
is left in an almost subordinate position. This Sordini 
naturally sent back the unaccompanied covering letter 
for completion. Now months, if not years, had passed 
by this time since that first communication from Depart- 
ment A, which is understandable enough, for when — 
which is the rule — a document* goes the proper route, 
it reaches the department at the outside in a day and 
is settled that day, but when it once in a while loses 
its way then in an organisation so efficient as ours its 
proper destination must be sought for literally i^ith 
desperation, otherwise it mightn't be found ; and then, 
well then the search may last really for a long time. 
Accordingly, when we got Sordini's note we had only 
a vague memory of the affair, there were only two of 
us to do the work at that time. Mizzi and myself, the 
teacher hadn't yet been assigned to us, we only kept 
copies in the most important instances, so we could only 
reply in the most vague terms that we knew nothing of 
this engagement of a Land Surveyor and that as far as 
we knew there was no need for one. 

“ But," here the Superintendent interrupted himself 
as if, carried on by his tale, he had gone too far, or 
as if at least it were possible that he had gone too far, 
" doesn't the story bore you ? " 

No," said K., " it amuses me." 

Thereupon the Superintendent said : " I'm not 

telling it to amuse you." 

" It only amuses me," said K., " because it gives me 
an insight into the ludicrous bungling which in certain 
circumstances may decide the life of a human being." 

" You haven’t been given any insight into that yet," 



THE CASTLE 


85 

replied the Superintendent gravely, and I can go 
on with my story. Naturally Sordini was not satisfied 
with our reply. I admire the man, although he is a 
plague to me. He literally distrusts everyone ; even if, 
for instance, he has come to know somebody, through 
countless circumstances, as the most reliable man in the 
world, he distrusts him as soon as fresh circumstances 
arise, as i^ he didn't want to know him, or rather as if 
he wanted to know that he was a scoundrel. I consider 
that right and proper, an official must behave like that ; 
unfortunately with my nature I can't follow out this 
principle ,* you see yourself how frank I am with you, a 
sti^nger, about those things, I can't act in any other 
way. But Sordini, on the contrary, was seized by sus- 
picion when he read our reply. Now a large corre- 
spondence began to grow. Sordini enquired how I 
had suddenly recalled that a Land Surveyor shouldn't 
be summoned. I replied, drawing on Mizzi's splendid 
memory, that the first suggestion had come from the 
chancellory itself (but that it had come from a different 
department we had of course forgotten long before 
this). Sordini countered : ' Why had I only mentioned 
this official order now ? ' I replied : ‘ Because I had 
just remembered it.' Sordini : ‘ That was very extra- 
ordinary.' Myself : ‘ It was not in the least extra- 

ordinary in such a long-drawn-out business.' Sordini ; 

‘ Yes, it was extraordinary, for the order that I remem- 
bered didn't exist.' Myself : ' Of course it didn't 

exist, for the whole document had gone a-missing.' 
Sordini : ‘ But there must be a memorandum extant 
relating to this first communication, and there wasn't 
one extant.' That drew me up, for that an error should 
happen in Sordini's department I neither dared to 
maintain nor to believe. Perhaps, my dear Land 



86 


THE CASTLE 


Surveyor, you'll make the reproach against Sordini in 
your mind, that in consideration of my assertion he 
should have been moved at least to make enquiries 
the other departments about the affair. But that is 
just what would have been wrong ; I don't want any 
blame to attach to this man, no, not even in your 
thoughts. It's a working principle of the Head Bureau 
that the very possibility of error must be r^Jed out of 
account. This ground princij5le is justified by the 
consummate organisation of the whole authority, and 
it is necessary if the maximum speed in transacting 
business is to be attained. So it wasn't within Sordini's 
power to make enquiries in other departments, besides 
they simply wouldn't have answered, because they 
would have guessed at once that it was a case of hunting 
out a possible error." 

" Allow me, Superintendent, to interrupt you with 
a question," said K. " Did you not mention once 
before a Control Authority ? From your description 
the whole economy is one that would rouse one's 
apjDrehension if one could imagine the control failing." 

' You're very strict," said the Superintendent, " but 
multiply your strictness a thousand times and it would 
still be nothing compared with the strictness which the 
Authority imposes on itself. Only a total stranger 
could ask a question like yours. Is there a Control 
Authority ? There are only control authorities. Frankly 
it isn’t their function to hunt out errors in the vulgar 
sense, for errors don't happen, and even when once in 
a while an error does happen, as in your case, who can 
say finally that it's an error 7 " 

" This is news indeed ! " cried K. 

" It’s very old news to me," said the Superintendent. 
" Not unlike yourself Tm convinced that an error has 



THE CASTLE 


87 

occurred, and as a result Sordini is quite ill with despair, 
and the first Control Officials, whom we have to thank 
foe discovering the source of error, recognise that there 
is an error. But who can guarantee that the second 
Control Officials will decide in the same way and the 
third lot and all the others ? ** 

That may be,*' said K. I would much rather 
not mix in 4hese speculations yet, besides this is the first 
mention I've heard of those Control Officials and 
naturally I can't understand them yet. But I fancy 
that two things must be distinguished here : firstly, 
what is transacted in the offices and can be construed 
again officially this way or that, and secondly, my own 
actual person, me myself, situated outside of the offices 
and threatened by their encroachments, which are so 
meaningless that I can't even yet believe in the serious- 
ness of the danger. The first evidently is covered by 
what you. Superintendent, tell me in such extraordinary 
and disconcerting detail ; all the same I would like to 
hear a word now about myself." 

"I'm coming to that too," said the Superintendent, 
" but you couldn't understand it without my giving 
a few more preliminary details. My mentioning the 
Control Officials just now was premature. So I must 
turn back to the discrepancies with Sordini. As I 
said, my defence gradually weakened. But whenever 
Sordini has in his hands even the slightest hold against 
anyone, he has as good as w'on, for then his vigilance, 
energy, and alertness are actually increased and it's a 
terrible moment for the victim, and a glorious one for 
the victim's enemies. It's only because in other cir- 
cumstances I have experienced this last feeling that I'm 
able to speak of him as I do. All the same I have never 
managed yet to come within sight of him. He can't 



THE CASTUF 


88 

get down here, he's so overwhelmed with work ; firom 
the descriptions Tve heard of his room every wall is 
covered with columns of documents tied together, piled 
on top of one another ; those are only the documents 
that Sordini is working on at the time, and as bundles 
of papers arc continually being taken away and brought 
in, and all in great haste, those columns are always 
falling on the floor, and it's just those perpetual crashes, 
following fast on one another, that have come to 
distinguish Sordini's workroom. Yes, Sordini is a 
worker and he gives the same scrupulous care to the 
smallest case as to the greatest." 

"Superintendent," said K., "you always call, my 
case one of the smallest, and yet it has given hosts of 
officials a great deal of trouble, and if, perhaps, it was 
unimportant at the start, yet through the diligence of 
officials of Sordini 's type it has grown into a great aflFair. 
Very much against my will, unfortunately, for my 
ambition doesn’t run to seeing columns of documents, all 
about me, rising and crashing together, but to working 
quietly at my drawing-board as a humble Land Surveyor." 

" No," said the Superintendent, " it’s not at all a 
great affair, in that respect you’ve no ground for com- 
plaint — it’s one of the least important among the least 
important. The importance of a case is not deter- 
mined by the amount of work it involves, you’re far 
from understanding the authorities if you believe that. 
But even if it’s a question of the amount of work, your 
case would remain one of the slightest ; ordinary cases, 
those without any so-called errors I mean, provide far 
more work and far more profitable work as well. 
Besides you know absolutely nothing yet of the actual 
work which was caused by your case. I’ll tell you 
about that now. Well, presently Sordini left me out 



THE CASTLE 


89 

of count, but the clerks arrived, and every day a formal 
enquiry involving the most prominent members of the 
cd^nmunity was held in the Herrenhof. The majority 
stuck by me, only a few held back — the question of a 
Land Surveyor appeals to peasants — they scented secret 
plots and injustices and what not, found a leader, no 
less, and Sordini was forced by their assertions to the 
conviction lhat if I had^ brought the question forward 
in the Town Council, every voice wouldn't have been 
against the summoning of a Land Surveyor. So a 
commonplace — namely, that a Land Surveyor wasn’t 
needed — was turned after all into a doubtful matter at 
least. A man called Brunswick distinguished himself 
especially, you don't know him, of course ; probably 
he’s not a bad man, only stupid and fanciful, he's a 
son-in-law of Lasemann's." 

'' Of the Master Tanner ? " asked K., and he described 
the full-bearded man whom he had seen at Lasemann's. 

" Yes, that's the man," said the Superintendent. 

" I know his wife, too," said K., a little at random. 

" That's possible," replied the Superintendent briefly. 

" She's beautiful," said K., " but rather pale and 
sickly. She comes, of course, from the Castle ? " It 
was half a question. 

The Superintendent looked at the clock, poured some 
medicine into a spoon, and gulped at it hastily. 

" You only know the official side of the Castle ? " 
asked K. bluntly. 

"That's so," replied the Superintendent, with an 
ironical and yet grateful smile, " and it's the most 
important. And as for Brunswick ; if we could exclude 
him from the Council we would almost all be glad, and 
Lasemann not least. But at that time Brunswick 
gained some influence, he's not an orator of course, but 



THE CASTLE 


90 

a shoutcf ; but even that can do a lot. And so it came 
about that I was forced to lay the matter before the Town 
Council ; however, it was Brunswick's only immediate 
triumph, for of course the Town Council refused by a 
large majority to hear anything about a Land Surveyor. 
That, too, was a long time ago, but the whole time since 
the matter has never been allowed to rest, partly owing 
to Sordini's conscientiousness,^who by thecnost painful 
sifting of data sought to fathom the motives of th'"> 
majority no less than the opposition, partly owing to 
Brunswick's stupidity and ambition, who had several 
personal acquaintances among the authorities whom he 
set working with fresh inventions of his fancy. Sordini, 
at any rate, didn't let himself be deceived by Brunswick 
— how could Brunswick deceive Sordini ? — but simply 
to prevent himself from being deceived a new sifting of 
data was necessary, and long before it was ended 
Brunswick had already thought out something new ; 
he's very, very versatile, no doubt of it, that goes with 
his stupidity. And now I come to a peculiar character- 
istic of our administrative apparatus. Along with its 
precision it's extremely sensitive as well. When an 
ail air has been weiglied for a very long time, it may 
happen, even before the matter has been fully con- 
sidered, that suddenly in a flash the decision comes in 
some unforeseen place that, moreover, can't be found 
any longer later on, a decision that settles the matter, 
if in most cases justly, yet all the same arbitrarily. It's 
as if the administrative apparatus were unable any 
longer to bear the tension, the year-long irritation 
caused by the same affair — probably trivial in itself — 
and had hit upon the decision by itself, without the 
assistance of the officials. Of course a miracle didn't 
happen and certainly it was some clerk who hit upon 



THE CASTLE 


91 


the solution or the unwritten decision, but in any case 
it couldn’t be discovered by us, at least by us here, or 
even by the Head Bureau, which clerk had decided in 
this case and on what grounds. The Control Officials 
only discovered that much later, but we will never learn 
it ; besides by this time it would scarcely interest any- 
body. Now, as I said, it’s just these decisions that are 
generally exoellent. The only annoying thing about 
them — it’s usually the case with such things — is that one 
learns too late about them and so in the meantime keeps 
on still passionately canvassing things that were decided 
long ago. I don’t know whether in your case a de- 
cision of this kind happened — some people say yes* 
others no — but if it had happened then the summons 
would have been sent to you and you would have made 
the long journey to this place, much time would have 
passed, and in the meanwhile Sordini would have been 
working away here all the time on the same case until 
he was exhausted, Brunswick would have been intriguing, 
and I would have been plagued by both of them. I 
only indicate this possibility, but I know the following 
for a fact : a Control Official discovered meanwhile 


that a query had gone out from the Department A 
to the Town Council many years before regarding a 
L.and Surveyor, without having received a reply up till 
then. A new enquiry was sent to me, and now the 
whole business was really cleared up. Department A 
was satisfied with my answer that a Land Surveyor was 
not needed, and Sordini was forced to recognise that 
he had not been equal to this case and, innocently it 
is true, had got through so much nerve-racking work 
’ for nothing. If new work hadn’t come rushing in 
as ever from every side, and if your case hadn’t been 
a very unimportant case — one might almost say the 



THE CASTLE 


92 

least important among the unimportant — ^we mig^ 
all of us liave breathed freely again, I fancy eve 
Sordini himself ; Brunswick was the only one that 
grumbled, but that was only ridiculous. And now 
imagine to yourself, Land Surveyor, my dismay when 
after the fortunate end of the whole business — and since 
then, too, a great deal of time had passed by — suddenly 
you appear and it begins to look as if the whole thing 
must begin all over again. S^ou*!! understand of course 
that Tm firmly resolved, so far as Tm concerned, not to 
let that happen in any case ? '' 

Certainly,** said K., “ but I understand better still 
that a terrible abuse of my case, and probably of the 
law, is being carried on. As for me, I shall know how 
to protect myself against it.** 

“ How will you do it ? ** asked the Superintendent. 

Tm not at liberty to reveal that,** said K. 

'' I don*t want to press myself upon you,** said the 
Superintendent, only I would like you to reflect that 
in me you have — I won*t say a friend, for we*re complete 
strangers of course — but to some extent a business friend. 
The only thing I will not agree to is that you should be 
taken on as Land Surveyor, but in other matters you can 
draw on me with confidence, frankly to the extent of 
my power, which isn’t great.** 

** You always talk of the one thing,** said K., ** that 
1 shan’t be taken on as Land Surveyor, but Tm Land 
Surveyor already, here is Klamm’s letter.** 

Klamm’s letter,** said the Superintendent. “ That’s 
valuable and worthy of respect on account of Klamm’s 
signature which seems to be genuine, but all the same — 
yet 1 won’t dare to advance it on my own unsupported 
word. Mizzi," he called, and then : “ But what are 
you doing ? ” 



THE CASTLE 


93 

the assistants, left so long unnoticed, had 
clearly not found the paper they were looking for, 
and had then tried to shut everything up again in the 
cabinet, but on account of the confusion and super- 
abundance of papers had not succeeded. Then the 
assistants had hit upon the idea which they were 
carrying out now. They had laid the cabinet on its 
back on the ^oor, crammed all the documents in, then 
along with Mizzi had kAelt on the cabinet door and 
were trying now in this way to get it shut. 

So the paper hasn’t been found,” said the Super- 
intendent. ” A pity, but you know the story already ; 
really we don’t need the paper now, besides it will 
certainly be found sometime yet ; probably it’s at the 
teacher’s place, there’s a great pile of papers there too. 
But come over here now with the candle, Mizzi, and 
read this letter for me,” 

Mizzi went over and now looked still more grey and 
insignificant as she sat on the edge of the bed and leaned 
against the strong, vigorous man, who put his arm 
round her. In the candlelight only her pinched face 
was cast into relief, its simple and austere lines softened 
by nothing but age. Hardly had she glanced at the 
letter when she clasped her hands lightly and said : 
“ From Klamm.” Then they read the letter together, 
whispered for a moment, and at last, just as the assistants 
gave a ” Hurrah ! ” for they had finally got the cabinet 
door shut — ^which earned them a look of silent gratitude 
from Mizzi — the Superintendent said : 

” Mizzi is quite of my opinion and now I am at 
liberty to express it. This letter is in no sense an official 
letter, but only a private letter. That can be clearly seen 
in the very mode of address : ‘ My dear Sir.’ More- 
over, there isn’t a single word in it showing that you’ve 



THE CASTLE 


94 

been taken on as Land Surveyor ; on the contrary it's 
all about state service in general, and even that is not 
absolutely guaranteed, as you know, that is, the task of 
proving that you are taken on is laid on you. Finally, 
you are officially and expressly referred to me, the 
Superintendent, as your immediate superior, for more 
detailed information, which, indeed, has in great part 
been given already. To anyone who k^ows how to 
read official communications,* and consequently knows 
still better how to read unofficial letters, all this is 
only too clear. That you, a stranger, don't know 
it doesn't surprise me. In general the letter means 
nothing more than that Klamm intends to take a 
personal interest in you if you should be taken into 
the state service." 

" Superintendent," said K., " you interpret the letter 
so well that nothing remains of it but a signature on a 
blank sheet of paper. Don't you see that in doing this you 
depreciate Klamm's name, which you pretend to respect? " 

" You misunderstand me," said the Superintendent, 
" I don't misconstrue the meaning of the letter, my 
reading of it doesn't disparage it, on the contrary. A 
private letter from Klamm has naturally far more 
significance than an official letter, but it hasn't precisely 
the kind of significance that you attach to it." 

" Do you know Schwarzer ? " asked K. 

" No," replied the Superintendent. " Perhaps you 
know him, Mizzi ? You don't know him either ? No, 
we don't know him." 

" That's strange," said K., " he's a son of one of the 
under-castellans." 

" My dear Land Surveyor," replied the Superin- 
tendent, " how on earth should I know all the sons of 
all the under-castellans ? " 



THE CASTLE 


95 

" Right/' said K., then you'll just have to take my 
word that he is one. I had a sharp encounter with this 
Schwarzcr on the very day of my arrival. Afterwards he 
made a telephone enquiry of an under-castellan called Fritz 
and received the information that I was engaged as Land 
Surveyor. How do you explain that, Superintendent? " 
Very simply," replied the Superintendent. " You 
haven't once yp till now come into real contact with 
our authorities. All those* contacts of yours have been 
illusory, but owing to your ignorance of the circum- 
stances you take them to be real. And as for the tele- 
phone. As you see, in my place, though I've certainly 
enough to do with the authorities, there's no telephone. 
In inns and suchlike places it may be of real use, as 
much use say as a penny-in-the-slot musical instrument, 
but it's nothing more than that. Have you ever tele- 
phoned here ? Yes ? Well, then perhaps you'll under- 
stand what I say. In the Castle the telephone works 
beautifully of course. I've been told it's going there all 
the time, that naturally speeds up the work a great 
deal. We can hear this continual telephoning in our 
telephones down here as a humming and singing, you 
must have heard it too. Now this humming and sing- 
ing transmitted by our telephones is the only real and 
reliable thing you'll hear, everything else is deceptive. 
There's no fixed connection with the Castle, no central 
exchange which transmits our calls further. When 
anybody calls up the Castle from here the instruments 
in all the subordinate departments ring, or rather 
they would all ring if practically all the departments — 

I know it for a certainty — didn't leave their receivers 
©fl. Now and then, however, a fatigued official may 
feel the need of a little distraction, especially in the 
evenings and at night ana may hang tne receiver on. 



THE CASTLE 


96 

Then we get an answer, but an answer of course that's 
merely a practical joke. And that's very understand- 
able too. For who would take the responsibility of 
interrupting, in the middle of the night, the extremely 
important work up there that goes on furiously the 
whole time, with a message about his own little private 
troubles ? I can't comprehend how even a stranger 
can imagine that when he calls up Sordini, for example, 
it's really Sordini that answers. Far more probably it's 
a little copying clerk from an entirely different depart- 
ment. On the other hand, it may certainly happen 
once in a blue moon that when one calls up the little 
copying clerk Sordini will answer himself. Then finally 
the best thing is to fly from the telephone before the 
first sound comes through." 

" I didn't know it was like that, certainly," said K. 
" I couldn't know of all these peculiarities, but I didn't 
put much confidence in those telephone conversations and 
1 was always aware that the only things of real importance 
were those that happened in the Castle itself." 

" No," said the Superintendent, holding firmly on to 
tlic word, " these telephone replies certainly have a 
meaning, why shouldn't they ? How could a message 
given by an official from the Castle be unimportant? 
As I remarked before apropos Klamm's letter. All 
those utterances have no official significance ; when 
you attach official significance to them you go astray. 
On the other hand, their private significance in a 
friendly or hostile sense is very great, generally greater 
than an official communication could ever be." 

" Good," said K. " Granted that all this is so, I 
should have lots of good friends in the Castle : looked 
at rightly the sudden inspiration of that department 
all these years ago — saying that a Land Surveyor 



THE CASTLE 


97 

should be asked to come — was an act of friendship towards 
myself ; but then in the sequel one act was followed by 
another, until at last, on an evil day, I was enticed here 
and then threatened with being thrown out again." 

" There's a certain amount of truth in your view 
of the case," said the Superintendent ; " you're right 
in thinking that the pronouncements of the Castle 
arc not to be taken literally. But caution is always 
necessary, not only here, and always the more necessary 
the more important the pronouncement in question 
happens to be. But when you went on to talk about 
being enticed, I ceased to fathom you. If you had 
followed my explanation more carefully, then you must 
have seen that the question of your being summoned 
here is far too difficult to be settled here and now in the 
course of a short conversation." 

" So the only remaining conclusion," said K., "is 
that everything is very uncertain and insoluble, in- 
cluding my being thrown out." 

" Who would take the risk of throwing you out. Land 
Surveyor ? " asked the Superintendent. " The very 
uncertainty about your summons guarantees you the 
most courteous treatment, only you're too sensitive by 
.ill appearances. Nobody keeps you here, but that 
surely doesn't amount to throwing you out." 

" Oh, Superintendent," said K., " now again you're 
taking far too simple a view of the case. I'll enumerate 
for your benefit a few of the things that keep me here ; the 
sacrifice I made in leaving my home, the long and difficult 
journey, the well-grounded hopes I built on my engage- 
ment here, my complete lack of means, the impossibility 
lifter tliis of finding some other suitable job at home, and 
last but not least my fiancee, who lives here." 

" Oh, Frieda I " said the Superintendent without 

4 



THE CASTLE 


% 

showing any surprise. ** I know. But Frieda would 
follow you anywhere. As for the rest of what you said, 
some consideration will be necessary and TU comnwini- 
cate with the Castle about it. If a decision should be 
come to, or if it should be necessary first to interrogate 
you again, Til send for you. Is that agreeable to you ? 

‘‘ No, absolutely,** said K. I don*t want any act 
of favour ffon»jthe Castle, but my rights.** 

** Mizzi,** the Superintendent said to Viis wife, who 
still sat pressed against him, and lost in a day-dream 
was playing with Klamm*s letter, which she had folded 
into the shape of a little boat — K. snatched it from her 
in alarm. ** Mizzi, my foot is beginning to throb again, 
we must renew the compress.** 

K. got up. Then 1*11 take my leave,** he said. 
** Hm,** said Mizzi, who was already preparing a 
poultice, the last one was drawing too strongly.** K. 
turned away. At his last words the assistants with their 
usual misplaced zeal to be useful h^aThrown open both 
wings of the door. To protect the sickroom from the 
strong draught of cold air which was rushing in, K. 
had to be content with making the Superintendent a 
hasty bow. Then, pushing the assistants in front of him, 
he rushed out of the room and quickly closed the door. 


VI 

B efore the inn the landlord was waiting for him. 

Without being questioned he would not have 
ventured to address him, accordingly K. asked what* 
he wanted. “ Have you found new lodgings yet ? *’ 
asked the landlord, looking at ^the ground. ‘‘You 



THE CASTLE 


99 

were told to ask by your wife ? ” replied K., you're 
very much under her influence ? " ** No," said the 

landlord, " I didn't ask because of my wife. But she's 
very bothered and unhappy on your account, can't 
work, lies in bed and sighs and complains all the time." 
** Shall I go and see her ? " asked K. "I wish you 
would," said the landlord. " I've been to the Super- 
intendent's ajready to fetch you. I listened at the door 
but you were talking. 7 didn't want to disturb you, 
besides I was anxious about my wife and ran back 
again ; but she wouldn't see me, so there was nothing 
for it but to wait for you." " Then let's go at once," 
said K., " I'll soon reassure her." " If you could only 
manage it," said the landlord. 

They went through the bright kitchen where three 
or four maids, engaged all in different corners at the 
work they were happening to be doing, visibly stiffened 
on seeing K. From the kitchen the sighing of the 
landl^y could already be heard. She lay in a window- 
less annex separated from the kitchen by thin lath 
boarding. There was room in it only for a huge family 
bed and a chest. The bed was so placed that from it 
one could overlook the whole kitchen and superintend 
the work. From the kitchen, on the other hand, 
hardly anything could be seen in the annex. There it 
was quite dark : only the faint gleam of the purple 
bed-coverlet could be distinguished. Not until one 
entered and one's eyes became used to the darkness did 
one detach particular objects. 

" You've come at last," said the landlady feebly. 
She was lying stretched out on her back, she breathed 
with visible difficulty, she had thrown back the feather 
quilt. In bed she looked much younger than in her 
clothes, but a nightcap of delicate lacework which she 



lOO 


THE CASTLE 


wore, although it was too small and nodded on her 
head, made her sunk face look pitiable. Why should 
I have come ? asked K. mildly. ‘‘You didn't send 
for me." ‘‘You shouldn't have kept me waiting so 
long," said the landlady with the capriciousness of an 
invalid. ‘‘ Sit down," she went on, pointing to the 
bed, ‘‘ and you others go away." Meantime the maids 
as well as the assistants had crowded in. /‘ I'll go too, 
Gardana," said the landlord.*' This was the first time 
that K. had heard her name. ‘‘ Of course," she 
replied slowly, and as if she were occupied with other 
thoughts she added absently : ‘‘ Why should you remain 
any more than the others ? " But when they had all 
retreated to the kitchen — even the assistants this time 
went at once, besides, a maid was behind them — 
Ciardana was alert enough to grasp that everything she 
said could be heard in there, for the annex lacked a 
door, and so she commanded everyone to leave the 
kitchen as well. It was immediately done. 

" Land Surveyor," said Gardana, ‘‘ there's a wrap 
hanging over there beside the chest, will you please 
reach me it ? I'll lay it over me. I can't bear the 
feather quilt, my breatliing is so bad." And as K. 
handed her the wrap, she went on : ‘‘ Look, this is a 
beautiful wrap, isn't it ? " To K. it seemed to be an 
ordinary woollen wrap ; he felt it with his fingers 
again merely out of politeness, but did not reply. ‘‘Yes, 
it's a beautiful wrap," said Gardana covering herself 
up. Now she lay back comfortably, all her pain seemed 
to have gone, she actually had enough strength to think 
of the state of her hair which had been disordered by 
her lying position ; she raised herself up for a moment * 
and rearranged her coiffeur a little round the nightcap. 
Her hair was abundant. 



THE CASTLE 


lOI 


K. became impatient, and began : “ You asked me, 
madam, whether I had found other lodgings yet/* “ I 
ask^d you ? *' said the landlady, no, you*re mistaken/* 
“ Your husband asked me a few minutes ago/* ** That 
may well be,** said the landlady ; Tm at variance with 
him. When I didn*t want you here, he kept you here, 
now that Tm glad to have you here, he wants to drive 
you away. He*s always like that.** Have you 
changed your opinion of me so greatly, then ? ** asked K. 
‘‘In a couple of hours?** “I haven*t changed my 
opinion,** said the landlady more freely again ; ** give 
me your hand. There, and now promise to be quite 
frank with me and 1*11 be the same with you.** “ Right,** 
said K., “ but who*s to begin first? ** I shall,** said 
the landlady. She did not give so much the impression 
of one who wanted to meet K. half-way, as of one who 
was eager to have the first word. 

She drew a photograph from under the pillow and 
held it out to K. “ Look at that portrait,** she said 
eagerly. To see it better K. stepped into the kitchen, 
but even there it was not easy to distinguish anything 
on the photograph, for it was faded with age, cracked in 
several places, crumpled, and dirty. ** It isn*t in very 
good condition,** said K. “ Unluckily no,** said the 
landlady, “ when one carries a thing about with one 
for years it*s bound to be the case. But if you look at it 
carefully, you*ll be able to make everything out, you*ll 
see. But I can help you ; tell me what you see, I like 
to hear anyone talk about the portrait. Well, then ? ** 
“ A young man,** said K. “ Right,** said the landlady, 
“ and what is he doing ? ** “It seems to me he*s 
lying on a board stretching himself and yawning.** The 
landlady laughed. “ Quite wrong,'* she said. But 
here’s the board and here he is lying on it,** persisted K. 



102 


THE CASTLE 


on his side. But look more carefully," said the land- 
lady in annoyance, " is he really lying down ? " " No," 
said K. now, " he's floating, and now I can see it, it's 
not a board at all, but probably a rope, and the young 
man is taking a high leap." " You see ! " replied the 
landlady triumphantly, " he's leaping, that's how the 
official messengers practise. I knew quite well that 
you would make it out. Can you make out his face, 
too ? " I can only make out* his face very dimly," said 
K., " he's obviously making a great effort, his mouth 
is open, his eyes tightly shut and his hair fluttering." 
" Well done," said the landlady appreciatively, " no- 
body who never saw him could have made out more 
than that. But he was a beautiful young man. I 
only saw him once for a second and I'll never forget 
him." " Who was he then ? " asked K. " He was 
the messenger that Klamm sent to call me to him the 
first time." 

K. could not hear properly, his attention was dis- 
tracted by the rattling of glass. He immediately dis- 
covered the cause of the disturbance. The assistants 
were standing outside in the yard hopping from one 
foot to the other in the snow, behaving as if they were 
glad to see him again ; in their joy they pointed each 
other out to him and kept tapping all the time on the 
kitchen window. At a threatening gesture from K. they 
stopped at once, tried to pull one another away, but 
the one would slip immediately from the grasp of the 
other and soon they were both back at the window 
again. K. hurried into the annex where the assistants 
could not see him from outside and he would not have 
to see them. But the soft and as it were beseeching 
tapping on the window-pane followed him there too 
for a long time. 



THE CASTLE 


103 

" The assistants again," he said apologetically to the 
landlady and pointed outside. But she paid no atten- 
tion to him ; she had taken the portrait from him, looked 
at it, smoothed it out, and pushed it again under her 
pillow. Her movements had become slower, but not 
with weariness, but with the burden of memory. She 
had wanted to tell K. the story of her life and had for- 
gotten about him in thinking of the story itself. She 
was playing with the fringe of her wrap. A little time 
went by before she looked up, passed her hand over 
her eyes, and said : " This wrap was given me by 
Klamm. And the nightcap, too. The portrait, the 
wrap, and the nightcap, these are the only three things 
of his I have as keepsakes. Tm not young like Frieda, 
I’m not so ambitious as she is, nor so sensitive either, 
she’s very sensitive to put it bluntly, I know how to 
accommodate myself to life, but one thing I must 
admit, I couldn’t have held out so long here without 
these three keepsakes. Perhaps these three things seem 
very trifling to you, but let me tell you, Frieda, who has 
had relations with Klamm for a long time, doesn’t 
possess a single keepsake from him. I have asked 
her, she's too fanciful, and too difficult to please besides ; 
I, on the other hand, though I was only three times 
with Klamm — after that he never asked me to come 
again, I don’t know why — I managed to bring three 
presents back with me all the same, having a pre- 
monition that my time would be short. Of course one 
must make a point of it. Klamm gives nothing of 
himself, but if one sees something one likes lying about 
there, one can get it out of him.” 

• K. felt uncomfortable listening to these tales, much as 
they interested him. ” How long ago was all that, 
then ? ” he asked with a sigh. 



THE CASTLE 


104 

Over twenty years ago," replied the landlady, 
" considerably over twenty years." 

" So one remains faithful to Klamm as long as that," 
said K. " But are you aware, madam, that these 
stories give me grave alarm when I think of my future 
married life ? " 

The landlady seemed to consider this intrusion of his 
own affairs unseasonable and gave him an angry sidelook. 

" Don't be angry, madam," said K. ** I've nothing 
at all to say against Klamm. All the same, by force of 
circumstances I have come in a sense in contact with 
Klamm ; that can't be gainsaid even by his greatest 
admirer. Well, then. As a result of that I am forced 
whenever Klamm is mentioned to think of myself as 
well, that can't be altered. Besides, madam," here K. 
took hold of her reluctant hand, " reflect how badly our 
last talk turned out and that this time we want to part 
in peace." 

" You're right," said the landlady, bowing her head, 
" but spare me. I'm not more touchy than other 
people ; on the contrary, everyone has his sensitive spots, 
and I have only this one." 

" Unfortunately it happens to be mine too," said K., 
" but I promise to control myself. Now tell me, 
madam, how I am to put up with my married life in 
face of this terrible fidelity, granted that Frieda, too, 
resembles you in that ? " 

" Terrible fidelity ! " repeated the landlady with a 
growl. "Is it a question of fidelity ? I'm faithful to 
my husband — but Klamm 7 Klamm once chose me 
as his mistress, can I ever lose that honour 7 And you 
ask how you arc to put up with Frieda 7 Oh, Land.. 
Surveyor, who are you after all that you dare to ask 
such things 7 " 



THE CASTLE 


105 


" Madam,'* said K. wamingly. 

I know," said the landlady, controlling herself, " but 
my husband never put such questions. I don't know 
which to call the unhappier, myself then or Frieda now. 
Frieda who saucily left Klamm, or myself whom he 
stopped asking to come. Yet it is probably Frieda, 
though she hasn't even yet guessed the full extent of her 
unhappiness, it seems. Still, my thoughts were more 
exclusively occupied by my unhappiness then, all the 
same, for I had always to be asking myself one question, 
and in reality haven't ceased to ask it to this day : Why 
did this happen ? Three times Klamm sent for me, but 
he never sent a fourth time, no, never a fourth time ! 
What else could I have thought of during those days ? 
What else could I have talked about with my husband, 
whom I married shortly afterwards ? During the day 
we had no time — ^we had taken over this inn in a wretched 
condition and had to struggle to make it respectable — 
but at night ! For years all our nightly talks turned on 
Klamm and the reason for his changing his mind. And 
if my husband fell asleep during those talks I woke him 
and we went on again." 

" Now," said K., "if you'll permit me, I'm going to 
ask a very rude question." 

The landlady remained silent. 

" Then I mustn't ask it," said K. " Well, that 

serves my purpose as well." 

" Yes," replied the landlady, " that serves your pur- 
pose as well, and just that serves it best. You mis- 
construe everything, even a person's silence. You 
can't do anything else. I allow you to ask your 
question." 

" If I misconstrue everything, perhaps I misconstrue 
my question as well, perhaps it's not so rude after all, 



THE CASTLE 


io6 

I only want to know how you came to meet your 
husband and how this inn came into your hands/* 

The landlady wrinkled her forehead, but said in- 
differently : ‘‘ That's a very simple story. My father 
was the blacksmith, and Hans, my husband, who was 
a groom at a big farmer's place, came often to see him. 
That was just after my last meeting with Klamm. I 
was very unhappy and really had no right to be so, for 
everything had gone as it should, and tfiat I wasn't 
allowed any longer to see Klamm was Klamm's own 
decision. It was as it should be then, only the grounds 
for it were obscure. I was entitled to enquire into them, 
but I had no right to be unhappy ; still I was, all the 
same, couldn't work, and sat in our front garden all day. 
There Hans saw me, often sat down beside me. I 
didn't complain to him, but he knew how things were, 
and as he was a good young man, he wept with me. 
The wife of the landlord at that time had died and he 
had consequently to give up business — besides he was 
already an old man. Well once as he passed our garden 
and saw us sitting there, he stopped, and without more 
ado offered us the inn to rent, didn't ask for any money 
in advance, for he trusted us, and set the rent at a very 
low figure. I didn't want to be a burden on my father, 
nothing else mattered to me, and so thinking of the inn 
and of my new work that might perhaps help me to forget 
a little, I gave Hans my hand. That's the whole story." 

There was silence for a little, then K. said : " The 
behaviour of the landlord was generous, but rash, or had 
he particular grounds for trusting you both ? " 

" He knew Hans well," said the landlady ; " he was 
Hans's uncle." 

" Well then," said K., " Hans's family must have been 
very anxious to be connected with you ? " 



THE CASTLE 


107 

** It may be so," said the landlady, " I don’t know. 
I’ve never bothered about it." 

But it must have been so all the same," said K., 

seeing that the family was ready to make such a 
sacrifice and to give the inn into your hands absolutely 
without security." 

" It wasn’t imprudent, as was proved later," said the 
landlady. " I threw myself into the work, I was strong, 
I was the blacksmith’s daughter, I didn’t need maid 
or servant. I was everywhere, in the taproom, in the 
kitchen, in the stables, in the yard. I cooked so well 
that I even enticed some of the Herrenhof’s customers 
away. You’ve never been in the inn yet at lunch-time, 
you don’t know our day customers ; at that time there 
were more of them, many of them have stopped coming 
since. And the consequence was that we were able 
not merely to pay the rent regularly, but that after a 
few years we bought the whole place and to-day it’s 
practically free of debt. The further consequence, I 
admit, was that I ruined my health, got heart disease, 
and am now an old woman. Probably you think that 
I'm much older than Hans, but the fact is that he’s only 
two or three years younger than me and will never grow 
any older either, for at his work — smoking his pipe, 
listening to the customers, knocking out his pipe again, 
and fetching an occasional pot of beer — at that sort of 
work one doesn’t grow old." 

" What you’ve done has been splendid," said K. 
" I don’t doubt that for a moment, but we were speaking 
of the time before your marriage, and it must have been 
an extraordinary thing at that stage for Hans’s family to 
.press on the marriage — at a money sacrifice, or at least 
at such a great risk as the handing over of the inn must 
have been — and without trusting in anything but your 



THE CASTLE 


108 

powers of work, which besides nobody knew of then, and 
Hans's powers of work, which everybody must have 
known beforehand were nil." 

" Oh, well," said the landlady wearily, " I know 
what you're getting at and how wide you are of the 
mark. Klamm had absolutely nothing to do with the 
matter. Why should he have concerned himself about 
me, or better, how could he in any case have concerned 
himself about me ? He knew^nothing about me by that 
time. The fact that he had ceased to summon me was 
a sign that he had forgotten me. When he stops 
summoning people, he forgets them completely. I 
didn’t want to talk of this before Frieda. And it's not 
mere forgetting, it's something more than that. For 
anybody one has forgotten can come back to one's 
memory again, of course. With Klamm that's im- 
possible. Anybody that he stops summoning he has 
forgotten completely, not only as far as the past is 
concerned, but literally for the future as well. If I try 
very hard I can of course think myself into your ideas, 
valid, perhaps, in the very different land you come 
from. But it's next thing to madness to imagine that 
Klamm could have given me Hans as a husband simply 
that I might have no great difficulty in going to him 
if he should summon me sometime again. Where is 
the man who could hinder me from running to Klamm 
if Klamm lifted his little finger ? Madness, absolute 
madness, one begins to feel confused oneself when one 
plays with such mad ideas." 

No," said K., " I've no intention of getting con- 
fused ; my thoughts hadn't gone so far as you imagined, 
though, to tell the truth, they were on that road. For* 
the moment the only thing that surprises me is that 
Hans's relations expected so much from his marriage 



THE CASTLE 


109 

and that these expectations were actually fulfilled, at 
the sacrifice of your sound heart and your health, it is 
true. The idea that these facts were connected with 
Klamm occurred to me I admit, but not with the 
bluntness, or not till now with the bluntness that you 
give it — apparently with no object but to have a dig 
at me, because that gives you pleasure. Well, make 
the most of your pleasure I My idea, however, was this : 
first of all Ivlamm was obviously the occasion of your 
marriage. If it hadn't been for Klamm you wouldn't 
have been unhappy and wouldn't have been sitting 
doing nothing in the garden, if it hadn't been for Klamm 
Hans wouldn't have seen you sitting there, if it hadn't 
been that you were unhappy a shy man like Hans would 
never have ventured to speak, if it hadn't been for 
Klamm Hans would never have found you in tears, if 
it hadn't been for Klamm the good old uncle would 
never have seen you sitting there together peacefully, 
if it hadn't been for Klamm you wouldn't have been 
indifferent to what life still ofered you, and therefore 
would never have married Hans. Now in all this 
there's enough of Klamm already, it seems to me. But 
that's not all. If you hadn't been trying to forget, you 
certainly wouldn't have overtaxed your strength so 
much and done so splendidly with the inn. So Klamm 
was there too. But apart from that Klamm is also the 
root cause of your illness, for before your marriage your 
heart was already worn out with your hopeless passion 
for him. The only question that remains now is, what 
made Hans's relatives so eager for the marriage? You 
yourself said just now that to be Klamm's mistress is a 
• distinction that can't be lost, so it may have been that 
that attracted them. But besides that, I imagine, they 
had the hope that the lucky star that led you to Klamm 



no 


THE CASTLE 


— assuming that it was a lucky star, but you maintain 
that it was— was your star and so would remain constant 
to you and not leave you quite so quickly and suddenly 
as Klamm did.** 

** Do you mean all this in earnest ? ** asked the 
landlady. 

Yes, in earnest,** replied K. immediately, ** only I 
consider Hans*s relations were neither entifely right nor 
entirely wrong in their hope^, and I think, too, I can 
see the mistake that they made. In appearance, of 
course, everything seems to have succeeded. Hans is 
well provided for, he has a handsome wife, is looked up 
to, and the inn is free of debt. Yet in reality everything 
has not succeeded, he would certainly have been much 
happier with a simple girl who gave him her first love, 
and if he sometimes stands in the inn there as if lost, as 
you complain, and because he really feels as if he were 
lost — without being unhappy over it, I grant you, I 
know that much about him already — it*s just as true 
that a handsome, intelligent young man like him would 
be happier with another wife, and by happier I 
mean more independent, industrious, manly. And you 
yourself certainly can*t be happy, seeing you say you 
wouldn’t be able to go on without these three keepsakes, 
and your heart is bad, too. Then were Hans*s relatives 
mistaken in their hopes ? I don*t think so. The blessing 
was over you, but they didn’t know how to bring it down.** 
Then what did they miss doing ? '* asked the land- 
lady. She was lying outstretched on her back now 
gazing up at the ceiling. 

” To ask Klamm,** said K. 

So we’re back at your case again,** said the landlady. ^ 
Or at yours,** said K. Our affairs run parallel.*' 

“What do you want from Klamm?** asked the 



THE CASTLE 


111 


landlady. She had sat up, had shaken out the pillows 
so as to lean her back against them, and looked K. full 
in* the eyes. Tve told you frankly about my experi- 
ences, from which you should have been able to learn 
something. Tell me now as frankly what you want to 
ask Klamm. Tve had great trouble in persuading 
Frieda to go up to her room and stay there, I was 
afraid you wouldn*t talk freely enough in her presence/' 
I have nothing to hide," said K. " But first of all I 
want to draw your attention to something. Klamm 
forgets immediately, you say. Now in the first place 
that seems very improbable to me, and secondly it is 
undemonstrable, obviously nothing more than legend, 
thought out moreover by the flapperish minds of those 
who have been in Klamm's favour. Tm surprised that 
you believe in such a banal invention." 

" It's no legend," said the landlady, " it's much 
rather the result of general experience." 

" I see, a thing then to be refuted by further experi- 
ence," said K. " Besides there's another distinction 
still between your case and Frieda's. In Frieda's case 
it didn't happen that Klamm never summoned her 
again, on the contrary he summoned her but she didn't 
obey. It's even possible that he's still waiting for her." 

The landlady remained silent, and only looked K. 
up and down with a considering stare. At last she 
said : " I'll try to listen quietly to what you have to 
say. Speak frankly and don't spare my feelings. I've 
only one request. Don't use Klamm's name. Call him 
‘ him ' or something, but don't mention him by name." 

" Willingly," replied K., " but what I want from 
him is difficult to express. Firstly, I want to see him 
at close quarters ; then I want to hear his voice ; then 
I want to get from him what his attitude is to our 



112 


THE CASTLE 


marriage. What I shall ask from him after that depends 
on the outcome of our interview. Lots of things may 
come up in the course of talking, but still the most 
important thing for me is to be confronted with him. 
You see I haven't yet spoken with a real official. That 
seems to be more difficult to manage than I had thought. 
But now Tm put under the obligation of speaking to 
him as a private person, and that, in my opinion, is 
much easier to bring about. •As an official I can only 
speak to him in his bureau in the Castle, which may be 
inaccessible, or — and that's questionable, too — in the 
Herrenhof. But as a private person I can speak to 
him anywhere, in a house, in the street, wherever I 
happen to meet him. If I should find the official in 
front of me, then I would be glad to accost him as well, 
but that's not my primary object." 

" Right," said the landlady pressing her face into the 
j^illows as if she were uttering something shameful, 
"if by using my influence I can manage to get your 
request for an interview passed on to Klamm, promise 
me to do nothing on your own account until the reply 
comes back." 

" I can't promise that," said K., " glad as I would be 
to fulfil your wishes or your whims. The matter is 
urgent, you see, especially after the unfortunate outcome 
of my talk with the Superintendent." 

" That excuse falls to the ground," said the landlady, 
" tlie Superintendent is a person of no importance. 
Haven't you found that out ? He couldn't remain 
another day in his post if it weren't for his wife, who 
runs everything." 

" Mizzi ? " asked K. The landlady nodded. " She 
was present," said K. ** Did she express her opinion ? " 
asked the landlady. 



THE CASTLE 


( 


”3 


" No/' replied K., '' but I didn't get the impression 
that she could." 

"•There," said the landlady, " you see how dis- 
torted your view of everything here is. In any case ; 
the Superintendent's arrangements for you are of no 
importance, and I'll talk to his wife when I have time. 
And if I promise now in addition that Klamm's answer 
will come in a week at latest, you can't surely have any 
further grounds for not obKging me." 

" All that is not enough to influence me," said K. 
" My decision is made, and I would try to carry it out 
even if an unfavourable answer were to come. And 
.seeing that this is my fixed intention, I can't very well 
dsk for an interview beforehand. A thing that would 
remain a daring attempt, but still an attempt in good 
faith so long as I didn't ask for an interview, would 
turn into an open transgression of the law after re- 
ceiving an unfavourable answer. That frankly would 
be far vl^orse." 

" Worse ? " said the landlady. " It's a transgression 
of the law in any case. And now you can do what you 
like. Reach me over my skirt." 

Without paying any regard to K.'s presence she pulled 
on her skirt and hurried into the kitchen. For a long 
time already K. had been hearing noises in the dining- 
room. There was a tapping on the kitchen-hatch. 
The assistants had unfastened it and were shouting that 
they were hungry. Then other faces appeared at it. 
One could even hear a subdued song being chanted by 
several voices. 

Undeniably K.'s conversation with the landlady 
•had greatly delayed the cooking of the midday meal, 
it was not ready yet and the customers had assembled. 
Nevertheless nobody had dared to set foot in the kitchen 



THE CASTLE 


II4 

after the landlady's order. But now when the observers 
at the hatch reported that the landlady was coming, the 
maids immediately ran back to the kitchen, and as K. 
entered the dining-room a surprisingly large company, 
more than twenty, men and women — all attired in 
provincial but not rustic clothes — streamed back from 
the hatch to the tables to make sure of their seats. Only 
at one little table in the corner was a married couple 
seated already with a few children. The man, a kindly, 
blue-eyed person with disordered grey hair and beard, 
stood bent over the children and with a knife beat time 
to their singing, which he perpetually strove to soften. 
Perhaps he was trying to make them forget their hunger 
by singing. The landlady threw a few indifferent words 
of apology to her customers, nobody complained of her 
conduct. She looked round for the landlord, who had 
fled from the difficulty of the situation, however, long 
ago. Then she went slowly into the kitchen ; she did 
not take any more notice of K., who hurried to Frieda 
in her room. 


VII 

U PSTAIRS K. ran into tlie teacher. The room was 
improved almost beyond recognition so well had 
Frieda set to work. It was well aired, the stove amply 
stoked, the floor scrubbed, the bed put in order, the 
maids’ filthy pile of things and even their photographs 
cleared away ; the table, which had literally struck one 
in the eye before with its crust of accumulated dust,* 
was covered with a white embroidered cloth. One was 
in a position to receive visitors now. K.'s small change 



THE CASTLE 


of underclothes hanging before the fire — Frieda must 
have washed them early in the morning — did not spoil 
the impression much. Frieda and the teacher were 
sitting at the table, they rose at K/s entrance. Frieda 
greeted K. with a kiss, the teacher bowed slightly. 
Distracted and still agitated by his talk with the land- 
lady, K. began to apologise for not having been able yet 
to visit the teacher ; it was as if he were assuming that 
the teacher nad called oft him finally because he was 
impatient at K/s absence. On the other hand, the 
teacher in his precise way only seemed now gradually 
to remember that sometime or other there had been 
some mention between K. and himself of a visit. 
‘'You must be. Land Surveyor,"' he said slowly, " the 
stranger I had a few words with the other day in 
the church square." " I am," replied K. shortly ; the 
behaviour which he had submitted to when he felt 
homeless he did not intend to put up with now here in 
his room. He turned to Frieda and consulted with her 
about an important visit which he had to pay at once 
and for which he would need his best clothes. Without 
further enquiry Frieda called over the assistants, who 
were already busy examining the new tablecloth, and 
commanded them to brush K.'s suit and shoes — which he 
had begun to take off — down in the yard. She herself took 
a shirt from the line and ran down to the kitchen to iron it. 

Now K. was left alone with the teacher, who was 
seated silently again at the table ; K. kept him waiting 
for a little longer, drew off his shirt and began to wash 
himself at the tap. Only then, with his back to the 
teacher, did he ask him the reason for his visit. " I 
^ have come at the instance of the Parish Superintendent," 
he said. K. made ready to listen. But as the noise of 
the water made it difficult to catch what K. said, the 



11 6 THE CASTLE 

teacher had to come nearer and lean against the wall 
beside him. K. excused his washing and his hurry by 
the urgency of his coming appointment. The teacher 
swept aside his excuses, and said : “You were dis- 
courteous to the Parish Superintendent, an old and 
experienced man who should be treated with respect.** 
“ Whether I was discourteous or not I can*t say,** said 
K. while he dried himself, “ but that I ha^ other things 
to think of than polite behavfour is true enough, for my 
existence is at stake, which is threatened by a scandalous 
official bureaucracy whose particular failings I needn*t 
mention to you, seeing that you*re an acting member 
of it yourself. Has the Parish Superintendent com- 
plained about me ? ** “ Where*s the man that he would 
need to complain of ? ** asked the teacher. “ And even 
if there was anyone, do you think he would ever do it ? 
Tve only made out at his dictation a short protocol on 
your interview, and that has shown me clearly enough 
how kind the Superintendent was and what your 
answers were like.*' 

While K. was looking for his comb, which Frieda must 
have cleared away somewhere, he said : “ What ? A 
protocol ? Drawn up afterwards in my absence by 
someone who wasn't at the interview at all ? That’s 
not bad. And why on earth a protocol ? Was it an 
official interview, then ? ** “ No,** replied the teacher, 

“ a semi-official one, the protocol too was only semi- 
official. It was merely drawn up because with us 
everything must be done in strict order. In any case 
it's finished now, and it doesn't better your credit.** 
K., who had at last found the comb, which had been 
tucked into the bed, said more calmly : “ Well then, it's 
finished. Have you come to tell me that? ** “ No,** 

said the teacher, “ but I'm not a machine and I had to 



THE CASTLE 


117 

give you my opinion. My instructions are only another 
proof of the Superintendent's kindness ; I want to 
emphasise that his kindness in this instance is incom- 
prehensible to me, and that I only carry out his in- 
structions because it's my duty and out of respect to 
the Superintendent." Washed and combed, K. now 
sat down at the table to wait for his shirt and clothes ; 
he was not very curious to know the message that the 
teacher had brought, he* was influenced besides by 
the landlady's low opinion of the Superintendent. " It 
must be after twelve already, surely ? " he said, thinking 
of the distance he had to walk ; then he remembered 
himself, and said : "You want to give me some message 
from the Superintendent." " Well, yes," said the 
teacher, shrugging his shoulders as if he were discarding 
all responsibility. " The Superintendent is afraid that, 
if the decision in your case takes too long, you might 
do something rash on your own account. For my 
own part I don't know why he should fear that — my 
own opinion is that you should just be allowed to do 
what you like. We aren't your guardian angels and 
we're not obliged to run after you in all your doings. 
Well and good. The Superintendent, however, is of 
a different opinion. He can't of course hasten the 
decision itself, which is a matter for the authorities. 
But in his own sphere of jurisdiction he wants to provide 
a temporary and truly generous settlement ; it simply 
lies with you to accept it. He offers you provisionally 
the post of school janitor." At first K. thought very 
little of the offer made him, but the fact that an offer 
had been made seemed to him not without significance. 
It seemed to point to the fact that in the Superintendent's 
opinion he was in a position to look after himself, to 
carry out projects against which the Town Council 



THE CASTLE 


Il8 


» 


itself was preparing certain counter measures. And 
how seriously they were taking the matter ! The 
teacher, who had already been waiting for a while, und 
who before that, moreover, had made out the protocol, 
must of course have been told to run here by the Super- 
intendent. When the teacher saw that he had made 
K. reflect at last, he went on ; ** I put my objections. 
I pointed out that up till now a janitor hadn't been 
found necessary ; the churchwarden's wife cleared up 
the place from time to time, and Fraulein Gisa, the 
second teacher, overlooked the matter. I had trouble 
enough with the children, I didn't want to be bothered 
by a janitor as well. The Superintendent pointed 
out that all the same the school was very dirty. I 
replied, keeping to the truth, that it wasn’t so very 
bad. And, I went on, would it be any better if we took 
on this man as janitor ? Most certainly not. Apart 
from the fact that he didn't know the work, there were 
only two big classrooms in the school, and no additional 
room ; so the janitor and his family would have to 
live, sleep, perhaps even cook in one of the classrooms, 
which could hardly make for greater cleanliness. But 
the Superintendent laid stress on the fact that this post 
would keep you out of difficulties, and that conse- 
quently you would do your utmost to fill it creditably ; 
he suggested further, that along with you we would 
obtain the services of your wife and your assistants, so 
that the school should be kept in first-rate order, and 
not only it, but the school-garden as well. I easily 
proved that this would not hold water. At last the 
Superintendent couldn't bring forward a single argu- 
ment in your favour ; he laughed and merely said that 
you were a Land Surveyor after all and so should be 
able to lay out the vegetable beds beautifully. Well, 



THE CASTLE 


1 


119 


against a joke there’s no argument, and so I came to 
you with the proposal/’ You’ve taken your trouble 
for .nothing, teacher,” said K. ” I have no intention 
of accepting the post/' ” Splendid ! ” said the teacher. 
“ Splendid I You decline quite unconditionally,” and 
he took his hat, bowed, and went. 

Immediately afterwards Frieda came rushing up the 
stairs with an excited face, the shirt still unironed in her 
hand ; she diH not reply to K.’s enquiries. To distract 
her he told her about the teacher and the offer ; she 
had hardly heard it when she flung the shirt on the 
bed and ran out again. She soon came back, but with 
the teacher, who looked annoyed and entered without 
any greeting. Frieda begged him to have a little 
patience — obviously she had done that already several 
times on the way up — then drew K. through a side 
door of which he had never suspected the existence, on 
to the neighbouring loft, and then at last, out of breath 
with excitement, told what had happened to her. 
Enraged that Frieda had humbled herself by making an 
avowal to K., and — ^what was still worse — had yielded 
to him merely to secure him an interview with Klamm, 
and after all had gained nothing but, so she alleged, cold 
and moreover insincere professions, the landlady was 
resolved to keep K. no longer in her house ; if he had 
connections with the Castle, then he should take 
advantage of them at once, for he must leave the house 
that very day, that very minute, and she would only 
take him back again at the express order and command 
of the authorities ; but she hoped it would not come to 
that, for she too had connections with the Castle and 
•would know how to make use of them. Besides he was 
only in the inn because of the landlord’s negligence, 
and moreover he was not in a state of destitution, for 



120 


THE CASTLE 


this very morning he had boasted of a roof which was 
always free to him for the night. Frieda of course 
was to remain ; if Frieda wanted to go with K. she^ the 
landlady, would be very sorry ; down in the kitchen 
she had sunk into a chair by the fire and cried at the 
mere thought of it. The poor, sick woman ; but how 
could she behave otherwise, now that, in her imagina- 
tion at any rate, it was a matter involving the honour 
of Klamm's keepsakes ? That was how ‘matters stood 
with the landlady. Frieda of course would follow him, 
K., wherever he wanted to go. Yet the position of 
both of them was very bad in any case, just for that 
reason she had greeted the teacher's offer with such joy ; 
even if it was not a suitable post for K., yet it was — that 
was expressly insisted on — only a temporary post ,* one 
would gain a little time and would easily find other 
chances, even if the final decision should turn out to be 
unfavourable. If it comes to the worst," cried Frieda 
at last, falling on K.'s neck, " we'll go away, what is 
tliere in the village to keep us ? But for the time being, 
darling, we'll accept the offer, won’t we ? I've fetched 
the teacher back again, you've only to say to him 
* Done,' that's all, and we'll move over to the school." 

" It's a great nuisance," said K. without quite 
meaning it, for he was not much concerned about his 
lodgings, and in his underclothes he was shivering up 
here in the loft, which without wall or window on two 
sides was swept by a cold draught, " you've arranged 
the room so comfortably and now we must leave it. 

I would take up the post very, very unwillingly ; the 
few snubs I've already had from the teacher have been 
painful enough, and now he's to become my superior,^ 
no less. If we could only stay here a little while longer, 
perhaps my position might change for the better this 



THE CASTLE 


121 


i 

very afternoon. If you would only remain here at 
least, we could wait on for a little and give the teacher 
a nen-committal answer. As for me, if it came to the 
worst, I could really always find a lodging for the 

night with Bar Frieda stopped him by putting 

her hand over his mouth. “ No, not that,'* she said 
beseechingly, “ please never mention that again. In 
everything else Til obey you. If you like Til stay on 
here by myself, sad as it will be for me. If you like, 
we'll refuse the offer, wrong as that would seem to me. 
For look here, if you find another possibility, even this 
afternoon, why, it's obvious that we would throw up 
the post in the school at once ; nobody would object. 
And as for your humiliation in front of the teacher, let 
me see to it that there will be none ; I'll speak to him 
myself, you'll only have to be there and needn't say 
anything, and later, too, it will be just the same, you'll 
never be made to speak to him if you don't want to, 
I— I alone — ^will be his subordinate in reality, and I 
won't be even that, for I know his weak points. So 
you see nothing will be lost if we take on the post, and 
a great deal if we refuse it ; above all, if you don't 
wring something out of the Castle this very day, you'll 
never manage to find, even for yourself, anywhere at 
all in the village to spend the night in, anywhere, that 
is, of which I needn’t be ashamed as your future wife. 
And if you don't manage to find a roof for the night, 
do you really expect me to sleep here in my warm 
room, while I know that you are wandering about out 
there in the dark and cold ? " K., who had been trying 
to warm himself all this time by clapping his chest with 
• his arms like a carter, said : Then there's nothing 

left but to accept ; come along ! ” 

When they returned to the room he went straight 



122 


THE CASTLE 


over to the fire ; he paid no attention to the teacher ; 
the latter, sitting at the table, drew out his watch and 
said : It*s getting late/' " I know, but we're com- 
pletely agreed at last," said Frieda, " we accept the 
post/' " Good," said the teacher, " but the post is 
offered to the Land Surveyor ,* he must say the word 
himself." Frieda came to K.'s help. " Really," she 
said, " he accepts the post. Don't you, K. ? " So K. 
could confine his declaration ^o a simple ^ Yes," which 
was not even directed to the teacher but to Frieda. 
" Then," said the teacher, " the only thing that remains 
for me is to acquaint you with your duties, so that in 
that respect we can understand each other once and for 
all. You have. Land Surveyor, to clean and heat both 
classrooms daily, to make any small repairs in the 
house, further, to look after the class and gymnastic 
apparatus personally, to keep the garden path free of 
snow, run messages for me and the lady teacher, and 
look after all the work in the garden in the warmer 
seasons of the year. In return for that you have the right 
to live in whichever one of the classrooms you like ; but, 
when both rooms are not being used at the same time 
for teaching, and you are in the room that is needed, 
you must of course move to the other room. You 
mustn't do any cooking in the school ; in return you 
and your dependants will be given your meals here in 
the inn at the cost of the Town Council. That you 
must behave in a manner consonant with the dignity 
of the school, and in particular that the children dur- 
ing school hours must never be allowed to witness 
any unedifying matrimonial scenes, I mention only in 
passing, for as an educated man you must of course 
know that. In connection with that I want to say 
further that we must insist on your relations with 



THE CASTLE 


Fraulein Frieda being legitimised at the earliest possible 
moment. About all this and a few other trifling 
matt?ers, an agreement will be made out, which as soon 
as you move over to the school must be signed by you." 
To K. all this seemed of no importance, as if it did not 
concern him or at any rate did not bind him ; but the 
self-importance of the teacher irritated him, and he 
said carelessly : "I know, they're the usual duties." 
To wipe away the impression created by this remark 
Frieda enquired about the salary. " Whether there will 
be any salary," said the teacher, " will only be considered 
after a month's trial service." " But that is hard on 
us," said Frieda. " We'll have to marry on practically 
nothing, and have nothing to set up house on. Couldn't 
you make a representation to the Town Council, sir, to 
give us a small salary at the start ? Couldn^t you advise 
that? " " No," replied the teacher, who continued to 

direct his words to K. " Representations to the Town 
Council will only be made if I give the word, and I 
shan't give it. The post has only been given to you 
as a personal favour, and one can't stretch a favour too 
far, if one has any consciousness of one's obvious re- 
sponsibilities." Now K. intervened at last, almost 
against his will. " As for the favour, teacher," he said, 
" it seems to me that you're mistaken. The favour is 
perhaps rather on my side." " No," replied the 
teacher, smiling now that he had compelled K. to 
speak at last. " Tm completely grounded on that 
point. Our need for a janitor is just about as urgent 
as our need for a Land Surveyor. Janitor, Land Sur- 
veyor, in both cases it's a burden on our shoulders, 
ril still have a lot of trouble thinking out how I'm to 
justify the post to the Town Council. The best thing 
and the most honest thing would be to throw the pro- 



THE CASTLE 


124 


0 


posal on the table and not justify anything/* ** That’s 
just what I meant/' replied K., “ you must take me 
on against your will. Although it causes you grave 
perturbation, you must take me on. But when one is 
compelled to take someone else on, and this someone 
else allows himself to be taken on, then he is the 


one who grants the favour." " Strange ! " said the 
teacher. " What is it that compels us to take you on? 
The only thing that compels us is the Superintendent’s 
kind heart, his too kind heart. I see, Land Surveyor, 
that you'll have to rid yourself of a great many illusions, 
before you can become a serviceable janitor. And 
remarks such as these hardly produce the right atmo- 
sphere for the granting of an eventual salary. I notice, 
too, with regret that your attitude will give me a great 
deal of trouble yet ; all this time — I've seen it with my 
own eyes and yet can scarcely believe it — ^you've been 
talking to me in your shirt and drawers." " Quite 
so," exclaimed K. with a laugh, and he clapped his 
hands. " These terrible assistants, where have they 
been all this time ? " Frieda hurried to the door ; the 


teacher, who noticed that K. was no longer to be drawn 
into conversation, asked her when she would move 


into the school, " To-day," said Frieda. " Then to- 
morrow ril come to inspect matters," said the teacher, 
waved a good-bye and made to go out through the 
door, vA’hich Frieda had opened for herself, but ran into 
the maids, who already were arriving with their things 
to take possession of the room again ; and he, who made 
way for nobody, had to slip between them ; Frieda 
followed him. " You're surely in a hurry," said K., 
who this time w'as very pleased with the maids ; " had 
you to push your way in while we're still here ? " They 
did not answer, only twisted their bundles in embarrass- 



THE CASTLE 


merit, from which K. saw the well-known filthy rags 
projecting. " So youVe never washed your things 
yet,'^ said K. It was not said maliciously, but actually 
with a certain indulgence. They noticed it, opened 
their hard mouths in concert, showed their beautiful 


animal-like teeth and laughed noiselessly. ** Come 
along," said K., " put your things down, it's your room 
after all." As they still hesitated, however — the room 
must have seemed to them 'fill too well transformed — K. 


took one of them by the arm to lead her forward. But 
he let her go at once, so astonished was the gaze of 
both, which, after a brief glance between them, was 
now turned unflinchingly on K. " But now you've 
stared at me long enough," he said, repelling a vague, 
unpleasant sensation, and he took up his clothes and 
boots, which Frieda, timidly followed by the assistants, 
had just brought, and drew them on. The patience 
which Frieda had with the assistants, always incom- 
prehensible to him, now struck him again. After a 
long search she had found them below peacefully eating 
their lunch, the untouched clothes which they should 
have been brushing in the yard crumpled in their laps ; 
then she had had to brush everything herself, and yet 
she, who knew how to keep the common people in their 
places, had not even scolded them, and instead spoke 
in their presence of their grave negligence as if it were 
a trifling peccadillo, and even slapped one of them 
lightly, almost caressingly, on the cheek. Presently K. 
would have to talk to her about this. But now it was 


high time to be gone. " The assistants will stay here to 
help you with the removing," he said. They were not 
■in the least pleased with this arrangement ; happy and 
full, they would have been glad of a little exercise. 
Only when Frieda said, " Certainly, you stay here," 



THE CASTLE 


126 


C 


did they yield. Do you know where I'm going V‘ 
asked K. ** Yes/' replied Frieda. " And you don't 
want to hold me back any longer ? " asked K. " You'll ^ 
find obstacles enough," she replied, " what does any. 
thing I say matter in comparison ! " She kissed K. 
good-bye, and as he had had nothing at lunch-time, gave 
him a little packet of bread and sausage which she had 
brought for him from downstairs, reminded him that he 
must not return here again bat to the school, and accom- 
panied him, with her hand on his shoulder, to the door. 


VIII 

A t first K. was glad to have escaped from the 
crush of the maids and the assistants in the warm 
room. It was freezing a little, the snow was firmer, 
the going easier. But already darkness was actually 
beginning to fall, and he hastened his steps. 

The Castle, whose contours were already beginning 
to dissolve, lay silent as ever ; never yet had K. seen 
there the slightest sign of life — perhaps it was quite 
impossible to recognise anything at that distance, and 
yet the eye demanded it and could not endure that 
stillness. When K. looked at the Castle, often it seemed 
to him as if he were observing someone who sat quietly 
there in front of him gazing, not lost in thought and so 
oblivious of everything, but free and untroubled, as if 
he were alone with nobody to observe him, and yet 
must notice that he was observed, and all the same 
remained with his calm not even slightly disturbed f 
and really — one did not know whether it was cause or 
eilect — tile gaze of the observer could not remain con- 



THE CASTLE 


127 

centrated there, but slid away. This impression to-day 
was strengthened still further by the early dusk ; the 
longer he looked, the less he could make out and the 
deeper everything was lost in the twilight. 

Just as K. reached the Herrenhof, which was still 
unlighted, a window was opened in the first storey, and 
a stout, smooth-shaven young man in a fur coat leaned 
out and then remained at the window. He did not 
seem to make the slightest response to K.'s greeting. 
Neither in the hall nor in the taproom did K. meet any- 
body ; the smell of stale beer was still worse than last 
time ; such a state of things was never allowed even in 
the inn by the bridge. K. went straight over to the 
door through which he had observed Klamm, and 
lifted the latch cautiously, but the door was barred ; 
then he felt for the place where the peephole was, 
but the pin apparently was fitted so well that he could 
not find the place, so he struck a match. He was 
startled by a cry* In the corner between the door and 
the till, near the fire, a young girl was crouching and 
staring at him in the flare of the match, with partially 
opened sleep-drunken eyes. She was evidently Frieda's 
successor. She soon collected herself and switched on 
the electric light ; her expression was cross, then she 
recognised K. Ah, the Land Surveyor," she said 
smiling, held out her hand and introduced herself. " My 
name is Pepi." She was small, red-cheeked, plump ; 
her opulent reddish golden hair was twisted into a 
strong plait, yet some of it escaped and curled round 
her temples ; she was wearing a dress of grey shimmering 
material, falling in straight lines, which did not suit her 
in the least ; at the foot it was drawn together by a 
childishly clumsy silken band with tassels falling from 
it, which impeded her movements. She enquired after 



THE CASTLE 


128 

Frieda and asked whether she would come back soon. 
It was a question which verged on insolence, " As 
soon as Frieda went away," she said next, " I was called ■ 
here urgently because they couldn't find anybody suit- 
able at the moment ; I've been a chambermaid till 
now, but this isn't a change for the better. There's 
lots of evening and night work in this job, it's very 
tiring, I don't think I'll be able to stand it. I'm not 
surprised that Frieda threw it up." " Frieda was very 
happy here," said K., to make her aware definitely of the 
difference between Frieda and herself, which she did not 
seem to appreciate. " Don't you believe her," said 
Pepi, ** Frieda can keep a straight face better than 
otlicr people can. She doesn't admit what she doesn't 
want to admit, and so nobody noticed that she had 
anything to admit. I've been in service here with her 
several years already. We've slept together all that 
time in the same bed, yet I'm not intimate with her, and 
by now I’m quite out of her thoughts, that's certain. 
Perhaps her only friend is the old landlady of the 
Bridge Inn, and that tells a story too." " Frieda is my 
fiancee," said K., searching at the same time for the 
pccpliole in the door. " 1 know," said Pepi, " that's 
just the reason why I've told you. Otherwise it 
wouldn't have any interest for you." 

" 1 understand," said K. "You mean that I should 
be proud to have won such a reticent girl ? " " That's 

so," said she, laughing triumphantly, as if she had 
established a secret understanding with K. regarding 
Frieda. 

But it was not her actual words that troubled K. 
and deflected him for a little from his search, but- 
raihcr her appearance and her presence in this place. 
Certainly she was much younger than Frieda, almost 



THE CASTLE I29 

a child still, and her clothes were ludicrous ; she had 
obviously dressed in accordance with the exaggerated 
, notions which she had of the importance of a barmaid's 
position. And these notions were right enough in their 
way in her, for this position of which she was still in- 
capable had come to her unearned and unexpectedly, 
and only for the time being ; not even the leather 
reticule which Frieda always wore on her belt had been 
entrusted to her. And her ostensible dissatisfaction 
u ith the position was nothing but showing off. And 
\'ct, in spite of her childish mind, she too, apparently, 
had connections with the Castle ; if she was not lying, 
i>he had been a chambermaid ; without being aware 
of what she possessed she slept through the days here, 
and though if he took this tiny, plump, slightly round- 
backed creature in his arms he could not extort from her 
^\’hat she possessed, yet that could bring him in contact 
with it and inspirit him for his difficult task. Then 
could her case now be much the same as Frieda's ? Oh, 
no, it was different. One had only to think of Frieda's 
look to know that. K. would never have touched Pepi. 

^ All the same he had to lower his eyes for a little now, so 
greedily was he staring at her. 

It's against orders for the light to be on," said 
Pepi, switching it off again. " I only turned it on 
because you gave me such a fright. What do you 
want here really ? Did Frieda forget anything ? " 
" Yes," said K., pointing to the door, " a table-cover, a 
white embroidered table-cover, here in the next room." 
“Yes, her table-cover," said Pepi. " I remember it, 
a pretty piece of work. I helped with it myself, but 
•it can hardly be in that room." " Frieda thinks it is. 
Who lives in it, then ? " asked K. " Nobody," said 
Pepi, " it's the gentlemen's room ; the gentlemen eat 
5 



THE CASTLE 


and drink there ; that is, it's reserved for that, but most 
of them remain upstairs in their rooms/' If I knew,” 
said K,, “ that nobody was in there just now, I Would 
like very much to go in and have a look for the table- 
cover. But one can't be certain ; Klamm, for instance, 
is often in the habit of sitting there." " Klamm is 
certainly not there now," said Pepi. " He's making 
ready to leave this minute, the sledge is waiting for him 
in the yard." 

Without a word of explanation K. left the taproom 
at once ; when he reached the hall lie returned, instead ^ 
of to the door, to the interior of the house, and in a few 
steps reached the courtyard. How still and lovely "it 
was here I A four-square yard, bordered on three sides 
by the house buildings, and towards the street — a side- 
street which K. did not know — by a high white wall 
with a huge, heavy gate, open now. Here where the 
court was, the house seemed stiller than at tlie front ; 
at any rate the whole first storey jutted out and had a 
more impressive appearance, for it was encircled by a 
wooden gallery closed in except for one tiny slit for 
looking through. At the opposite side from K. and on 
the ground floor, but in the corner where the opposite 
wing of the house joined the main building, there was 
an entrance to the house, open, and without a door. 
Before it was standing a dark, closed sledge to which a 
pair of horses was yoked. Except for the coachman, 
whom at that distance and in the falling twilight K. 
guessed at rather than recognised, nobody was to be seen. 

Looking about him cautiously, his hands in his 
pockets, K. slowly coasted round two sides of the yard 
until he reached the sledge. The coachman — one of 
the peasants who had been the other night in the tap- 
room — smart in his fur coat, watched K. approaching 



THE CASTLE 


131 

non-committally, much as one follows the movements 
of a cat. Even when K. was standing beside him and 
had ^greeted him, and the horses were becoming a little 
restive at seeing a man looming out of the dusk, he 
remained completely detached. That exactly suited 
K/s purpose. Leaning against the wall of the house 
he took out his lunch, thought gratefully of Frieda and 
her solicitous provision for him, and meanwhile peered 
into the house. A very 'Singular and broken stair led 
downwards and was crossed down below by a low but 
apparently deep passage ; everything was clean and 
whitewashed, sharply and distinctly defined. 

The wait lasted longer than K. had expected. Long 
ago he had finished his meal, he was getting chilled, the 
twilight had changed into complete darkness, and still 
Klanim had not arrived. ** It might be a long time 
yet/' said a rough voice suddenly, so near to him that 
K. started. It was the coachman, who, as if wakening 
up, stretched himself and yawned loudly. ** What 
might be a long time yet ? " asked K., not ungrateful at 
being disturbed, for the perpetual silence and tension 
had already become a burden. Before you go away,'' 
said the coachman. K. did not understand him, but did 
not ask further ; he thought that would be the best 
means of making the insolent fellow speak. Not to 
answer here in this darkness was almost a challenge. 
And actually the coachman asked, after a pause : 
“Would you like some brandy?" "Yes," said K. 
witfiout thinking, tempted only too keenly by the 
offer, for he was freezing. " Then open the door of 
the sledge," said the coachman ; "in the side pocket 
•there are some flasks, take one and have a drink and 
then hand it up to me. With this fur coat it's diflScult 
for me to get down." K. was annoyed at being ordered 



about, but seeing that he had struck up with the coach- 
man he obeyed, even at the possible risk of being ‘Sur- 
prised by Klamm in the sledge. He opened the •ivide 
door and could without more ado have drawn a flask 
out of the side pocket which was fastened to the inside of 
the door ; but now that it was open he felt an impulse 
which he could not withstand to go inside the sledge ; 
all he wanted was to sit there for a minute. He slipped 
inside. The warmth within the sledge was extra- 
ordinary, and it remained although the door, which K. 
did not dare to close, was wide open. One could not 
tell whether it was a seat one was sitting on, so com- 
pletely was one surrounded by blankets, cushions, and 
furs ; one could turn and stretch on every side, and 
always one sank into softness and warmth. His 
arms spread out, his head supported on pillows which 
always seemed to be there, K. gazed out of the sledge 
into the dark house. Why was Klamm such a long 
time in coming ? As if stupefied by the warmth after 
his long wait in the snow, K. began to wish that Klamm 
would come soon. The thought that he would much 
rather not be seen by Klamm in his present position 
touched him only vaguely as a faint disturbance of his 
comfort. He was supported in this obliviousness by 
the behaviour of the coachman, who certainly knew 
that he was in the sledge and yet let him stay there 
without once demanding the brandy. That was very 
considerate, but still K. wanted to oblige him. Slowly, 
without altering his position, he reached out his hand 
to the side-pocket. But not the one in the open door, 
but the one behind him in the closed door ; after all, 
it didn’t matter, there were flasks in that one too. He 
pulled one out, unscrewed the stopper, and smelt ; 
involuntarily he smiled, the perfume was so sweet, so 



THE CASTLE 


133 

caressing, like praise and good words from someone 
wham one likes very much, yet one does not know 
cleally what they are for and has no desire to know, and 
is simply happy in the knowledge that it is one's friend 
who is saying them. Can this be brandy ? " K. asked 
himself doubtfully and took a taste out of curiosity. 
Yes, strangely enough it was brandy, and burned and 
warmed him. How wonderfully it was transformed in 
drinking out ‘of something which seemed hardly more 
than a sweet perfume into a drink fit for a coachman ! 

Can it be ? " K. asked himself as if self-reproachfully, 
and took another sip. 

Then — as K. was just in the middle of a long swig 
- everything became bright, the electric lights blazed 
inside on the stairs, in the passages, in the entrance 
hall, outside above the door. Steps could be heard 
coming down the stairs, the flask fell from K.'s hand, 
the brandy was spilt over a rug, K. sprang out of the 
sledge, he had just time to slam the door to, which made 
a loud noise, when a gentleman came slowly out of the 
house. The only consolation that remained was that 
it w as not Klamm, or was not that rather a pity ? It 
was the gentleman whom K. had already seen at the 
window on the first floor. A young man, very good- 
looking, pink and white, but very serious. K., too, 
looked at him gravely, but his gravity was on his own 
account. Really he would have done better to have 
sent his assistants here, they couldn't have behaved 
more foolishly than he had done. The gentleman still 
regarded him in silence, as if he had not enough breath 
in his overcharged bosom for what has to be said. 

► ' This is unheard of," he said at last, pushing his hat 
a little back on his forehead. What next ? The gentle- 
man knew nothing apparently of K.'s stay in the 



THE CASTLE 


IJ4 

sledge, and yet found something that was unheard *of} 
Perhaps that K* had pushed his way in as far as* the 
courtyard ? How do you come to be here ? ' J the 
gentleman asked next, more softly now, breathing 
freely again, resigning himself to the inevitable. What 
questions to ask 1 And what could one answer ? Was K. 
to admit simply and flatly to this man that his attempt, 
begun with so many hopes, had failed ? Instead of 
replying, K. turned to the sledge, opened the door and 
retrieved his cap, which he had forgotten there. He 
noticed with discomfort that the brandy was dripping 
from the footboard. 

Then he turned again to the gentleman, to show him 
that he had been in the sledge gave him no more com- 
punction now, besides that wasn't the worst of it ; when 
he was questioned, but only then, he would divulge the 
fact that the coachman himself had at least asked him 
to open the door of the sledge. But the real calamity 
was that the gentleman had surprised him, that there 
had not been enough time left to hide from him so as 
afterwards to wait in peace for Klamm, or rather that 
he had not had enough presence of mind to remain 
in the sledge, close the door and wait there among the 
rugs for Klamm, or at least to stay there as long as this 
man was about. True, he couldn't know of course 
whether it might not be Klamm himself who was 
coming, in which case it would naturally have been 
much better to accost him outside the sledge. Yes, 
there had been many things here for thought, but now 
there was none, for this was the end. 

“ Come w’ith me," said the gentleman, not really 
as a command, for the command lay not in the words, , 
but in a slight, studiedly indifferent gesture of the hand 
which accompanied them. " I'm waiting here for 





THE CASTLE 


135 

somebody/* said K., no longer in the hope of any success, 
but limply on principle. “ Come," said the gentleman 
once* more quite imperturbably, as if he wanted to 
show that he had never doubted that K. was waiting 
for somebody. " But then I would miss the person 
Tm waiting for,** said K. with an emphatic nod of his 
head. In spite of everything that had happened he 
had the feeling that what he had achieved thus far was 
something gaiifed, which it»was true he only held now 
in seeming, but which he must not relinquish all the 
same merely on account of a polite command. " You'll 
miss him in any case, whether you go or stay,** said the 
gentleman, expressing himself bluntly, but showing an 
unexpected consideration for K.'s line of thought. 
“ Then I would rather wait for him and miss him," 
said K. defiantly ; he would certainly not be driven 
away from here by the mere talk of this young man. 
Thereupon with his head thrown back and a super- 
cilious look on his face the gentleman closed his eyes 
for a few minutes, as if he wanted to turn from K.'s 
senseless stupidity to his own sound reason again, 
ran the tip of his tongue round his slightly parted 
lips, and said at last to the coachman ; " Unyoke the 

horses." 

Obedient to the gentleman, but with a furious side- 
glance at K., the coachman had now to get down in 
spite of his fur coat, and began very hesitatingly — as 
if he did not so much expect a counter-order from the 
gentleman as a sensible remark from K. — to back the 
horses and the sledge closer to the side wing, in which 
apparently, behind a big door, was the shed where the 
vehicles were kept, K, saw himself deserted, the sledge 
was disappearing in one direction, in the other, by the 
''ay he had come himself, the gentleman was receding. 



Ij6 THE CASTLE 

both it was true very slowly, as if they wanted to show 
K. that it was still in his power to call them back, f 
Perhaps he had this power, but it would have availed 
him nothing ; to call the sledge back would be to drive 
himself away. So he remained standing as one who held 
the field, but it was a victory which gave him no joy. 
Alternately he looked at the backs of the gentleman and 
the coachman. The gentleman had already reached 
the door through which K. had first tome into the 
courtyard ; yet once more he looked back, K. fancied 
he saw him shaking his head over such obstinacy, then 
with a short, decisive, final movement he turned away 
and stepped into the hall, where he immediately 
vanished. The coachman remained for a while still in 
the courtyard, he had a great deal of work with the 
sledge, he had to open the heavy door of the shed, 
back the sledge into its place, unyoke the horses, lead 
them to their stalls ; all this he did gravely, with 
concentration, evidently without any hope of starting 
soon again, and this silent absorption which did not 
spare a single side-glance for K. seemed to the latter 
a far heavier reproach than the behaviour of the gentle- 
man. And when now, after finishing his work in the 
shed, the coachman went across the courtyard in his 
slow, rolling walk, closed the huge gate and then 
returned, all very slowly, while he literally looked at 
nothing but his own footprints in the snow — and finally 
shut himself into the shed ; and now as all the electric 
lights went out too — for whom should they remain on ? 
— and only up above the slit in the wooden gallery still 
remained bright, holding one's wandering gaze for a 
little, it seemed to K. as if at last those people had 
broken off all relations with him, and as if now in 
reality he were freer than he had ever been, and at 



THE CASTLE 


137 

liberty to wait here in this place usually forbidden to 
hint as long as he desired, and had won a freedom such 
as hardly anybody else had ever succeeded in winning, 
and as if nobody could dare to touch him or drive 
him away, or even speak to him ; but — this conviction 
was at least equally strong — as if at the same time 
there was nothing more senseless, nothing more hope- 
less, than this freedom, this waiting, this inviolability. 


IX 

A nd he tore himself free and went back into the 
house — this time not along the wall but straight 
through the snow — and met the landlord in the hall, 
who greeted him in silence and pointed towards the 
door of the taproom. K. followed the hint, for he was 
shivering and wanted to see human faces ; but he was 
greatly disappointed when he saw there, sitting at a 
little table — which must have been specially set out, for 
usually the customers put up with upturned barrels — 
the young gentleman, and standing before him — an 
unwelcome sight for K. — the landlady from the Bridge 
Inn. Pepi, proud, her head thrown back and a fixed 
smile on her face, conscious of her incontestable dignity, 
her plait nodding with every movement, hurried to 
and fro, fetching beer and then pen and ink, for the 
gentleman had already spread out papers in front of 
him, was comparing dates which he looked up now in 
this paper, then again in a paper at the other end of 
the table, and was preparing to write. From her full 
height the landlady silently overlooked the gentleman 
and the papers, her lips pursed a little as if musing ; it 



THE CASTLE 


138 

was as if she had already said everything necessary and 
it had been well received. The Land Snrveyorf at 
last/' said the gentleman at K/s entrance, looRing 
up briefly, then burying himself again in his papers. 
The landlady, too, only gave K. an indiflFerent and not 
in the least surprised glance. But Pepi actually seemed 
to notice K. for the first time when he went up to the 
bar and ordered a brandy. 

K. leaned there, his hands pressed to his eyes, oblivious 
of everything. Then he took a sip of the brandy and 
pushed it back, saying it was undrinkable. " All the 
gentlemen drink it," replied Pepi curtly, poured out 
the remainder, washed the glass and set it on the rack. 
" The gentlemen have better stuff as well," said K. 
" It's possible," replied Pepi, " but I haven't," and with 
that she was finished with K. and once more at the 
gentleman's service, who, however, was in need of 
nothing, and behind whom she only kept walking to and 
fro in circles, making respectful attempts to catch a 
glimpse of the papers over his shoulder ; but that was 
only her senseless curiosity and self-importance, which 
the landlady, too, reprehended with knitted brows. 

Then suddenly the landlady's attention was distracted, 
she stared, listening intently, into vacancy. K. turned 
round, he could not hear anything in particular, nor 
did the others seem to hear anything ; but the land- 
lady ran on tip-toe and taking large steps to the door 
which led to the courtyard, peered through the key- 
hole, turned then to the others with wide, staring eyes 
and flushed cheeks, signed to them with her finger to 
come near, and now they peered through the keyhole 
by turns ; the landlady had, of course, the lion's share, 
but Pepi, too, was considered ; the gentleman was on 
the whole the most indifferent of the three. Pepi and 



THE CASTLE 


^9 

the gentleman came away soon, but the landlady kept 
on peering anxiously, bent double, almost kneeling ; 
one iiad almost the feeling that she was only imploring 
the keyhole now to let her through, for there had 
certainly been nothing more to see for a long time. 
When at last she got up, passed her hand over her face, 
arranged her hair, took a deep breath, and now at last 
seemed to be trying with reluctance to accustom her 
eyes again to Ithe room and the people in it, K. said, 
not so much to get his suspicions confirmed, as to fore- 
stall the announcement, so open to attack did he feel 
now : ** Has Klamm gone already then ? The land- 
lady walked past him in silence, but the gentleman 
answered from his table : “ Yes, of course. As soon 
as you gave up your sentry go, Klamm was able to leave. 
But it*s strange how sensitive he is. Did you notice, 
landlady, how uneasily Klamm looked round him ? '' 
The landlady did not appear to have noticed it, but the 
gentleman went on : Well, fortunately there was 

nothing more to be seen, the coachman had effaced even 
the footprints in the snow/' The landlady didn't 
notice anything," said K., but he said it without con- 
viction, merely provoked by the gentleman's assertion, 
which was uttered in such a final and unanswerable 
tone. " Perhaps I wasn't at the keyhole just then," 
said the landlady presently, to back up the gentleman, 
hut then she felt compelled to give Klamm his due as 
well, and added : " All the same, I can't believe in 
this terrible sensitiveness of Klamm. We are anxious 
about him and try to guard him, and so go on to infer 
that he's terribly sensitive. That's as it should be and 
dt's certainly Klamm's will. But how it is in reality 
we don't Imow. Certainly, Klamm will never speak 
to anybody that he doesn't want to speak to, no matter 



THE CASTLE 


140 

how much trouble this anybody may take, and no 
matter how insufferably forward he may be ; but I that 
fact alone, that Klamm will never speak to him, never 
allow him to come into his presence, is enough in itself : 
why after all should it follow that he isn't able to endure 
seeing this anybody ? At any rate, it can't be proved, 
seeing that it will never come to the test." The gentle- 
man nodded eagerly. " That is essentially my opinion 
too, of course," he said, " if I expressed myself a little 
differently, it was to make myself comprehensible to 
the Land Surveyor. All the same it's a fact that when 
Klamm stepped out of the doorway he looked round 
him several times." " Perhaps he was looking for me," 
said K. " Possibly," said the gentleman. " I hadn't 
thought of that." They all laughed, Pepi, who hardly 
understood anything that was being said, loudest of all. 

" Seeing we’re all so happy here now," the gentleman 
went on, "I want to beg you very seriously. Land 
Surveyor, to enable me to complete my papers by 
answering a few questions." " There's a great deal of 
writing there," said K. glancing at the papers from 
where he was standing. " Yes, a wretched bore," said the 
gentleman laughing again, " but perhaps you don't know 
yet who I am. I'm Momus, Klamm’s village secretary." 
At these words seriousness descended on the room ; 
although the landlady and Pepi knew quite well who 
the gentleman was, yet they seemed staggered by the 
utterance of his name and rank. And even the gentle- 
man himself, as if he had said more than liis judgment 
sanctioned, and as if he were resolved to escape at 
least from any after-effects of the solemn import implicit 
in his own words, buried himself in his papers and^ 
began to write, so that nothing was heard in the room 
but the saatching of his pen. " What is that : village 



THE CASTLE I4I 

secretary ? " asked K. after a pause. The landlady 
answered for Momus, who now that he had introduced 
himself did not regard it seemly to give such explana- 
tions himself ; Herr Momus is Klamm's secretary 
in the same sense as any of Klamm^s secretaries, but his 
official province, and if Tm not mistaken, his official 
standing ” — still writing Momus shook his head decidedly 
and the lanffiady amended her phrase — well then, 
his official province, but* not his official standing, is 
confined to the village. Herr Momus despatches any 
clerical work of Klamm*s which may become necessary 
in the village and as Klamm's deputy receives any 
petitions to Klamm which may be sent by the village/' 
As, still quite unimpressed by these facts, K. looked at 
the landlady with vacant eyes, she added in a half- 
embarrassed tone : That's how it's arranged ; all the 
gentlemen in the Castle have their village secretaries. " 
Momus, who had been listening far more attentively than 
K., supplied the landlady with a supplementary fact : 

Most of the village secretaries work only for one gentle- 
man, but I work for two, for Klamm and for Valla- 
bene." Yes," went on the landlady, remembering 
now on her side too, and turning to K., " Herr Momus 
works for two gentlemen, for Klamm and for Vallabene, 
and so is twice a village secretary." " Actually twice," 
said K., nodding to Momus — who now, leaning slightly 
forward, looked him full in the face — as one nods to a 
child whom one has just heard being praised. If there 
was a certain contempt in the gesture, then it was either 
unobserved or else actually expected. Precisely to K., 
it seemed, who was not considered worthy even to be 
seen in passing by Klamm, these people had described 
in detail the services of a man out of Klamm's circle 
N\ith the unconcealed intention of evoking K.'s recog- 



THE CASTLE 


142 

nition and admiration. And yet K. had no prcjper 
appreciation of it ; he, who with all his powers strove 
to get a glimpse of Klamm, valued very little, for 
example, the post of a Momus who was permitted to 
live in Klamm 's eye ; for it was not Klamm's environ- 
ment in itself that seemed to him worth striving for, but 
rather that he, K., he only and no one else, should attain 
to Klamm, and should attain to him not, to rest with 
him, but to go on beyond him, ‘farther yet, into the Castle. 

And he looked at his watch and said : But now 

I must be going home." Immediately the position 
changed in Momus's favour. "Yes, of course," the 
latter replied, " the school work calls. But you must 
favour me with just a moment of your time. Only a 
few short questions." " I don’t feel in the mood for it," 
said K. and turned towards the door. Momus brought 
down a document on the table and stood up ; " In the 
name of Klamm I command you to answer my 
questions." " In the name of Klamm I " repeated K., 
" does he trouble himself about my affairs, then ? " 
" As to that," replied Momus, " I have no information 
and you certainly have still less ; we can safely leave 
that to him. All the same I command you by virtue 
of my function granted by Klamm to stay here and to 
answer," " Land Surveyor," broke in the landlady. 
" I refuse to advise you any further, my advice till now, 
the most well-meaning that you could have got, has 
been cast back at me in the most unheard-of manner ; 
and I have come here to Herr Momus — I have nothing 
to hide — simply to give the office an adequate idea of 
your behaviour and your intentions and to protect 
myself for all time from having you quartered on me 
again ; that’s how we stand towards each other and 
that’s how we’ll always stand, and if I speak my mind 



THE CASTLE 


143 

aclordingly now, I don't do it, I can tell you, to help 
you, but to ease a little the hard job which Herr Momus 
is bound to have in dealing with a man like you. All 
the same, just because of my absolute frankness — and 
I couldn't deal otherwise than frankly with you even 
if I were to try — you can extract some advantage for 
yourself out of what I say, if you only take the trouble. 
In the present case I want to draw your attention to 
this, that the only road tiiat can lead you to Klamm is 
through this protocol here of Herr Momus. But I don't 
want to exaggerate, perhaps that road won't get you 
as far as Klamm, perhaps it will stop long before it 
reaches him ; the judgment of Herr Momus will decide 
that. But in any case that's the only road that will 
take you in the direction of Klamm. And do you 
intend to reject that road, for nothing but pride ? " 
“ Oh, madam," said K., " that's neither the only road 
to Klamm, nor is it any better than the others. But you, 
Mr. Secretary, decide this question, whether what I 
may say here can get as far as Klamm or not." " Of 
course it can," said Momus, lowering his eyes proudly 
and gazing at nothing, " otherwise why should I be 
secretary here ? " "Now you see, madam," said K., 
" I don't need a road to Klamm, but only to Mr. 
Secretary." " I wanted to throw open this road for 
you," said the landlady, " didn't I offer this morning to 
send your request to Klamm ? That might have been 
done through Herr Momus. But you refused, and yet 
from now on no other way will remain for you but this 
one. But frankly, after your attempt on Klamm's 
privacy, with much less prospect of success. All the 
same this last, tiny, vanishing, yes, actually invisible 
hope, is your only one." " How is it, madam," said 
K., " that originally you tried so hard to keep me from 



THE CASTLE 


144 

seeing Klamm, and yet now take my wish to see lim 
quite seriously, and seem to consider me lost largely ®on 
account of the miscarrying of my plan ? If at one time 
you can advise me sincerely from your heart against 
trying to see Klamm at all, how can you possibly drive 
me on the road to Klamm now, apparently just as 
sincerely, even though it*s admitted that the road may 
not reach as far as him ? '' ** Am I driving you on ? " 

asked the landlady. Do yeu call it driving you on 
when I tell you that your attempt is hopeless ? It 
would really be the limit of audacity if you tried in 
that way to push the responsibility on to me. Perhaps 
it's Herr Momus's presence that encourages you to do it. 
No, Land Surveyor, I'm not trying to drive you on to 
anytliing. I can admit only one mistake, that I over- 
estimated you a little when I first saw you. Your 
immediate victory over Frieda frightened me, I didn't 
know what you might still be capable of. I wanted 
to prevent further damage, and thought that the only 
means of achieving that was to shake your resolution by 
prayers and tlircats. Since then I have learned to look 
on the whole thing more calmly. You can do what 
you like. Your actions may no doubt leave deep foot- 
prints in the snow out there in the courtyard, but they'll 
do nothing more." " The contradiction doesn't seem 
to me to be quite cleared up," said K., " but I'm 
content with having drawn attention to it. But now I 
beg you, Mr. Secretary, to tell me whether the landlady's 
opinion is correct, that is, that the protocol which you 
want to take down from my answers can have the result 
of gaining me admission to Klamm. If that's the case. 
I'm ready to answer all your questions at once. In 
that direction I'm ready, indeed, for anything." " No," 
replied Momus, " that doesn't follow at all. It's simply 



THE CASTLE 


145 

a matter of keeping an adequate record of this afternoon's 
happenings for Klamm's village register. The record is 
already complete, there are only two or three omissions 
which you must fill in for the sake of order ; there's no 
other object in view and no other object can be 
achieved." K. gazed at the landlady in silence. " Why 
are you looking at me ? " asked she, " did I say any- 
thing else ? He's always like that, Mr. Secretary, he's 
alwa)’S like that. Falsifies «4ie information one gives him, 
and then maintains that he received false information. 
Tve told him from the first and I tell him again to-day 
that he hasn't the faintest prospect of being received by 
Klamm ; well, if there's no prospect in any case he 
won’t alter that fact by means of this protocol. Could 
anything be clearer ? I said further that this protocol is 
the only real official connection that he can have with 
Klamm. That too is surely clear and incontestable 
enough. But if in spite of that he won't believe me, and 
keeps on hoping — I don't know why or with what idea 
— that he’ll be able to reach Klamm, then so long as he 
remains in that frame of mind, the only thing that can 
help him is this one real official connection he has with 
Klamm, in other words, this protocol. That’s all I 
have said, and whoever maintains the contrary twists my 
words maliciously." " If that is so, madam," said K., 
“ then I beg your pardon, and I've misunderstood you ; 
for I thought — erroneously, as it turns out now — that 
I could take out of your former words that there was 
still some very tiny hope for me." " Certainly," replied 
the landlady, " that's my meaning exactly. You're 
twisting my words again, only this time in the opposite 
way. In my opinion there is such a hope for you, and 
founded actually on this protocol and nothing else. But 
it’s not of such a nature that you can simply fall on 



THE CASTLE 


146 

Herr Monius with the question : 'Will I be alleged 
to see Klamm if I answer your questions ? ' when 
a child asks questions like that people laugh, when a 
grown man does it it is an insult to all authority ; Hen 
Momus graciously concealed this under the politeness 
of his reply. But the hope that I mean consists simply 
in this, that through the protocol you have a sort of 
connection, a sort of connection perhaps with Klamm. 
Isn't that enough ? If anyo»e enquired for any service 
which might earn you the privilege of such a hope, 
could you bring forward the slightest one ? For the 
last time, that's the best that can be said about this hope 
of yours, and certainly Herr Momus in his official 
capacity could never give even the slightest hint of it. 
h\)r him it's a matter, as he says, merely of keeping a 
record of this afternoon's happenings, for the sake of 
order ; more than that he won't say, even if you ask 
him this minute his opinion of what I've said." " Will 
Klamm, then, Mr. Secretary," asked K., " read the 
protocol ? " "No," replied Momus, " why should he ? 

Klamm can't read every protocol, in fact he reads none. 

' Keep away from me with your protocols ! ' he usually 
says." " Land Surveyor," groaned the landlady, 

" you exhaust me with such questions. Do you think 
it's necessary, or even simply desirable, that Klamm 
should read this protocol and become acquainted word 
for word with the trivialities of your life ? Shouldn't you 
rather pray humbly that the protocol should be con- 
cealed from Klamm — a prayer, however, that would 
be just as unreasonable as the other, for who can hide 
anything from Klamm even though he has given many 
signs of his sympathetic nature ? And is it even ^ 
necessary for what you call your hope ? Haven't you 
admitted yourself that you would be content if you only 



THE CASTLE 


gotithe chance of speaking to Klamm, even if he never 
looked at you and never listened to you ? And won't 
you achieve that at least through the protocol, perhaps 
much more ? " “ Much more ? " asked K. In what 


way ? " If you wouldn't always talk about things 
like a child, as if they were for eating I Who on earth 
can give any answer to such questions ? The protocol 
will be put 41 Klamm's village register, you have heard 
that already, more than fhat can't be said with cer- 
tainty. But do you know yet the full importance of the 
protocol, and of Herr Momus, and of the village register ? 
Do you know what it means to be examined by Herr 
Momus ? Perhaps — to all appearances at least — he 
doesn't know it himself. He sits quietly there and 
does his duty, for the sake of order, as he says. But 
consider that Klamm appointed him, that he acts in 
Klamm’s name, that what he docs, even if it never 


reaches Klamm, has yet Klamm's assent in advance. 
And how can anything have Klamm's assent that isn't 
filled by his spirit ? Far be it from me to offer Herr 
Momus crude flattery — ^besides he would absolutely 
forbid it himself — but I'm speaking of him not as an 
independent person, but as he is when he has Klamm's 
assent, as at present ; then he's an instrument in the hand 
of Klamm, and woe to anybody who doesn't obey him." 

The landlady's threats did not daunt K. ; of the 
hopes with which she tried to catch him he was weary. 
Klamm was far away. Once the landlady had com- 
pared Klamm to an eagle, and that had seemed absurd 
in K.'s eyes, but it did not seem absurd now ; he thought 
of Klamm's remoteness, of his impregnable dwelling, of 
his silence, broken perhaps only by cries such as K. had 
never yet heard, of his downward-pressing gaze, which 
could never be proved or disproved, of liis wheelings 



THE CASTLE 


148 

which could never be disturbed by anything that K. ^did 
down below, which far above he followed at the behest 
of incomprehensible laws and which only for instants 
were visible — all these things Klamm and the eagle 
had in common. But assuredly these had nothing to 
do with the protocol, over which just now Momus was 
crumbling a roll dusted with salt, which he was eating 
with beer to help it out, in the process all the papers 
becoming covered with salt aftd carraway seeds. 

“ Good night,'* said K. I've an objection to any kind 
of examination,** and now he went at last to the door. 

He's going after all,** said Momus almost anxiously 
to the landlady. He won't dare," said she ; K. heard 
nothing more, he was already in the hall. It was cold 
and a strong wind was blowing. From a door on the 
opposite side came the landlord, he seemed to have 
been keeping the hall under observation from behind 
a peephole. He had to hold the tail of his coat round 
his knees, the wind tore so strongly at him in the hall. 
"You're going already. Land Surveyor?" he asked. 
" You're surprised at that ? " asked K. " I am," said 
the landlord, " haven't you been examined then ? " 
" No," replied K. " I didn't let myself be examined." 
" Why not ? " asked the landlord. " I don't know," 
said K., " why I should let myself be examined, why 
I should give in to a joke or an official whim. Perhaps 
some other time I might have taken it on my side too as 
a joke or as a whim, but not to-day." " Why cer- 
tainly, certainly," said the landlord, but he agreed 
only out of politeness, not from conviction. " I must let 
the servants into the taproom now," he said presently, 
" it's long past their time. Only I didn't want to 
disturb the examination." " Did you consider it as 
important as all that ? " asked K. " Well, yes," 



THE CASTLE 


149 

replied the landlord. “ I shouldn't have refused," 
said K. " No," replied the landlord, " you shouldn't 
have done that." Seeing that K. was silent, he added, 
whether to comfort K. or to get away sooner : " Well, 
well, the sky won't rain sulphur for all that." " No," 
replied K., " the weather signs don't look like it." And 
they parted laughing. 


X 

K STEPPED out into the windswept street and 
4 peered into the darkness. Wild, wild weather. 
As if there were some connection between the two he 
reflected again how the landlady had striven to make 
him accede to the protocol, and how he had stood out. 
The landlady's attempt had of course not been a 
straightforward one, surreptitiously she had tried to 
put him against the protocol at the same time ; in 
reality he could not tell whether he had stood out or 
given in. An intriguing nature, acting blindly, it 
seemed, like the wind, according to strange and remote 
behests which one could never guess at. 

He had only taken a few steps along the main street 
when he saw two swaying lights in the distance ; these 
signs of life gladdened him and he hastened towards 
them, while they, too, made in his direction. He could 
not tell why he was so disappointed when he recognised 
the assistants. Still, they were coming to meet him, 
evidently sent by Frieda, and the lanterns which 
delivered him from the darkness roaring round him 
were his own ; nevertheless he was disappointed, he 
had expected something else, not those old acquaint- 



150 


THE CASTLE 


ances who were such a burden to him. But the assist- 
ants were not alone ; out of the darkness between them 
Barnabas stepped out. ** Barnabas ! ** cried K. and he 
held out his hand, have you come to see me ? The 
surprise at meeting him again drowned at first all the 
annoyance which he had once felt at Barnabas. ''To 
see you,'* replied Barnabas unalterably friendly as 
before, " with a letter from Klamm." " A letter from 
Klamm ! " cried K. throwing -hack his head. " Lights 
here I " he called to the assistants, who now pressed 
close to him on both sides holding up their lanterns. 
K. had to fold the large sheet in small compass to protect 
it from the wind while reading it. Then he read : "To 
the Land Surveyor at the Bridge Inn. The surveying 
work which you have carried out thus far has been 
appreciated by me. The work of the assistants, too, 
deserves praise. You know how to keep them at their 
jobs. Do not slacken in your efforts ! Carry your 
work on to a fortunate conclusion. Any interruption 
would displease me. For the rest be easy in your mind ; 
the question of salary will presently be decided. I 
shall not forget you." K. only looked up from the 
letter when the assistants, who read far more slowly 
than he, gave three loud cheers at the good news 
and waved their lanterns. " Be quiet," he said, and 
to Barnabas : " There's been a misunderstanding." 

Barnabas did not seem to comprehend. " There's been 
a misunderstanding," K. repeated, and the weariness 
he had felt in the afternoon came over him again, the 
road to the schoolhouse seemed very long, and behind 
Barnabas he could see his whole family, and the assist- 
ants were still jostling him so closely that he had to 
drive them away with his elbows ; how could Frieda 
have sent them to meet him when he had commanded 



THE CASTLE 


that they should stay with her ? He could quite well 
have found his own way home, and better done, in- 
deed, than in this company. And to make matters 
worse one of them had wound a scarf round his neck 
whose free ends flapped in the wind and had several 
times been flung against K.'s face ; it is true, the other 
assistant had always disengaged the wrap at once with 
his long, pointed, perpetually mobile fingers, but that 
had not macfe things any better. Both of them seemed 
to have considered it an actual pleasure to walk here 
and back, and the wind and the wildness of the night 
threw them into raptures. ** Get out ! '' shouted K., 
“ seeing that you've come to meet me, why haven't 
you brought my stick ? What have I now to drive you 
home with ? " They crouched behind Barnabas, but 
they were not too frightened to set their lanterns on 
their protector's shoulders, right and left ; however, he 
shook them off at once. ** Barnabas," said K., and he 
felt a weight on his heart when he saw that Barnabas 
obviously did not understand him, that though his 
tunic shone beautifully when fortune was there, when 
things became serious no help was to be found in him, 
but only dumb opposition, opposition against which one 
could not fight, for Barnabas himself was helpless, he 
could only smile, but that was of just as little help as the 
stars up there against this tempest down below. " Look 
what Klamm has written ! " said K., holding the letter 
before his face. " He has been wrongly informed. I 
haven't done any surveying at all, and you see yourself 
how much the assistants are worth. And obviously, too, 
I can't interrupt work which I’ve never begun ; I can't 
even excite the gentleman's displeasure, so how can I 
have earned his appreciation ? As for being easy in my 
mind, I can never be that." " I'll see to it," said 



THE CASTLE 


152 

Barnabas, who all the time had been gazing past the 
letter, which he could not have read in any case, for he 
was holding it too close to his face* Oh,'' said K., you 
promise me that you'll see to it, but can I really believe 
you 7 I'm in need of a trustworthy messenger, now 
more than ever." K. bit his lips with impatience. 
"Sir," replied Barnabas, with a gentle inclination of 
the head — K. almost allowed himself to be seduced by 
it again into believing Barnabas — " I'll certiinly see to it, 
and I'll certainly see to the message you gave me last 
time as well." " What ! " cried K., " haven't you seen 
to that yet then 7 Weren't you at the Castle next 4ay ? " 
" No," replied Barnabas, " my father is old, you've seen 
him yourself, and there happened to be a great deal of 
work just then, I had to help him, but now I'll be going 
to the Castle again soon." " But what are you thinking 
of, you incomprehensible fellow 7 " cried K., beating 
his brow with his fist, " don't Klamm's affairs come 
before everything else, then ? You're in an important 
position, you're a messenger, and yet you fail me in 
this wretched manner ! What does your father's work 
matter 7 Klamm is waiting for this information, and 
instead of breaking your neck hurrying with it to him, 
you prefer to clean the stable ! " " My father is a 

cobbler/' replied Barnabas calmly, " he had orders 
from Brunswick, and I'm my father's assistant." 
" Cobblcr-orders-Brunswick I " cried K. bitingly, as if 
he wanted to abolish the words for ever. " And who 
can need boots here in these eternally empty streets 7 
And what is all this cobbling to me ? I entrusted you 
with a letter, not so that you might mislay it and 
crumple it on your bench, but that you might carry 
it at once to Klamm I " K. became a little more com- 
posed now as he remembered that after all Klamm had 



THE CASTLE 


153 

apparently been all this time in the Herrenhof and not 
in the Castle at all ; but Barnabas exasperated him 
again when, to prove that he had not forgotten K/s 
first message he now began to recite it. Enough ! I 
don't want to hear any more," he said. " Don't be angry 
with me, sir," said Barnabas, and as if unconsciously 
wishing to show disapproval of K. he withdrew his gaze 
from him and lowered his eyes, but probably he was 
only dejected by K.'s outburst. " I'm not angry with 
you," said K., and his exasperation turned now against 
himself. " Not with you, but it's a bad lookout for 
me only to have a messenger like you for important 
affairs." " Look here," said Barnabas, and it was as if, 
to vindicate his honour as a messenger, he was saying 
more than he should, " Klamm is really not waiting for 
your message, he's actually cross when I arrive. ‘ An- 
other new message,' he said once, and generally he gets 
up when he sees me coming in the distance and goes 
into the next room and doesn't receive me. Besides, it 
isn't laid down that I should go at once with every 
message ; if it were laid down of course I would go at 
once ; but it isn't laid down, and if I never went at all, 
nothing could be said to me. When I take a message 
it's of my own free will." "Well and good," replied 
K., staring at Barnabas and intentionally ignoring the 
assistants, who kept on slowly raising their heads by 
turns behind Barnabas's shoulder as from a trap-door, 
and hastily disappearing again with a soft whistle in 
imitation of the whistling of the wind, as if they were 
terrified at K. ; they enjoyed themselves like this for a 
long time. " What it's like with Klamm I don't know, 
but that you can understand everything there properly 
I very much doubt, and even if you did, we couldn't 
better things there. But you can carry a message and 



the castle 


154 

that's all I ask you. A quite short message. Can you 
carry it for me to-morrow and bring me the answer 
to-morrow, or at least tell me how you were received ) 
Can you do that and will you do that ? It would be of 
great service to me. And perhaps I'll have a chance 
yet of rewarding you properly, or have you any wish 
now, perhaps, that I can fulfil ? " " Certainly I'll 

carry out your orders," said Barnabas. " And will 
you do your utmost to carry them out as well as you can, 
to give the message to Klamm himself, to get a reply 
from Klamm himself, and immediately, all this imme- 
diately, to-morrow, in the morning, will you do that ? " 
" I'll do my best," replied Barnabas, " but I always do 
that." " We won't argue any more about it now," said 
K. " This is the message : ' The Land Surveyor begs 
the Director to grant him a personal interview ; he 
accepts in advance any conditions which may be at- 
tached to the permission to do this. He is driven to 
make this request because until now every intermediary 
has completely failed ; in proof of this he advances the 
fact that till now he has not carried out any surveying 
at all, and according to the information given him by 
the village Superintendent will never carry out such 
work ; consequently it is with humiliation and despair 
that he has read the last letter of the Director ; only a 
personal interview with the Director can be of any 
help here. The Land Surveyor knows how extra- 
ordinary his request is, but he will exert himself to make 
his disturbance of the Director as little felt as possible ; 
he submits himself to any and every limitation of time, 
also any stipulation which may be considered necessary 
as to the number of words which may be allowed him 
during the interview, even with ten words he believes 
he will be able to manage. In profound respect and 



THE CASTLE 


155 

extreme impatience he awaits your decision/' K. had 
forgotten himself while he was speaking, it was as if he 
were standing before Klamm's door talking to the 
porter. It has grown much longer than I had 
thought," he said, " but you must learn it by heart, I 
don’t want to write a letter, it would only go the same 
endless way as the other papers." So for Barnabas's 
guidance, K. scribbled it on a scrap of paper on the 
back of one ^Jf the assistants, while the other assistant 
held up the lantern ; but already K. could take it 
down from Barnabas's dictation, for he had retained 
it all and spoke it out correctly without being put 
off by the misleading interpolations of the assistants. 

You've an extraordinary memory," said K., giving 
him the paper, " but now show yourself extraordinary 
in the other thing as well. And any requests ? Have 
you none ? It would reassure me a little — ^I say it 
frankly — regarding the fate of my message, if you had 
any." At first Barnabas remained silent, then he said : 
" My sisters send you their greetings." " Your sisters," 
replied K. " Oh, yes, the big strong girls." " Both 
send you their greetings, but Amalia in particular," 
said Barnabas, " besides it was she who brought me 
this letter for you to-day from the Castle." Struck by 
this piece of information, K. asked : " Couldn't she 

take my message to the Castle as well ? Or couldn't 
you both go and each of you try your luck ? " " Amalia 

isn't allowed into the Chancellory," said Barnabas, 
otherwise she would be very glad to do it." " I'll 
come and see you perhaps to-morrow," said K., " only 
you come to me first with the answer. I'll wait for 
you in the school. Give my greetings to your sisters, 
too," K.'s promise seemed to make Barnabas very 
happy, and after they had shaken hands he could not 



THE CASTLE 


156 

help touching K. lightly on the shoulder. , As if every- 
thing were once more as it had been when Barnabas 
first walked into the inn among the peasants in all his 
glory, K. felt this touch on his shoulder as a distinction, 
though he smiled at it. In a better mood now, he let 
the assistants do as they pleased on the way home. 


XI 

H e reached the school chilled through and through, 
it was quite dark, the candles in the lanterns had 
burned down ; led by the assistants, who already knew 
their way here, he felt his road into one of the classrooms. 
“ Your first praiseworthy service, he said, remember- 
ing Klamm's letter. Still half-asleep Frieda aied out 
from a corner : ** Let K. sleep ! Don't disturb him ! " 
so entirely did K. occupy her thoughts, even though she 
had been so overcome with sleep that she had not been 
able to wait up for him. Now a light was got, but the 
lamp could not be turned up very far, for there was 
only a little paraffin left. The new household was still 
without many necessaries. The room had been heated, 
it was true, but it was a large one, sometimes used as 
the g}^mnasium — the gymnastic apparatus was standing 
about and hanging from the ceiling — and it had already 
used up all the supply of wood — had been very warm 
and cosy too, as K. was assured, but unfortunately had 
grown quite cold again. There was, however, a large 
supply of wood in a shed, but the shed was locked and 
the teacher had the key ; he only allowed this wood 
to be used for heating the school during teaching hours. 
The room could have been endured if there had been 



THE CASTLE 


157 

beds where one might have taken refuge. But in that 
line there was nothing but one sack stuffed with straw, 
covered with praiseworthy tidiness by a woollen rug 
of Frieda's, but with no feather-bed and only two rough, 
stiff blankets, which hardly served to keep one warm. 
And it was precisely at this wretched sack of straw that 
the assistants were staring greedily, but of course with- 
out any hope of ever being allowed to lie on it. Frieda 
looked anxiously at K. ; that she knew how to make a 
room, even the most wretched, habitable, she had 
proved in the Bridge Inn, but here she had not been 
able to make any headway, quite without means as 
she was. Our only ornaments are the gymnastic 
contraptions," said she, trying to smile through her 
tears. But for the chief deficiencies, the lack of sleeping 
accommodation and fuel, she promised absolutely to 
find help the very next day, and begged K. only to be 
patient till then. From no word, no hint, no sign 
could one have concluded that she harboured even the 
slightest trace of bitterness against K. in her heart, 
although, as he had to admit himself, he had torn her 
away first from the Herrenhof and now from the Bridge 
Inn as well. So in return K. did his best to find every- 
thing tolerable, which was not difficult for him, indeed, 
because in thought he was still with Barnabas repeating 
his message word for word, not however as he had given 
it to Barnabas, but as he thought it would sound before 
Klamm. After all, however, he was very sincerely glad 
of the coffee which Frieda had boiled for him on a spirit 
burner, and leaning against the almost cold stove 
followed the nimble, practised movements with which 
she spread the indispensable white table-cover on the 
teacher's table, brought out a flowered cup, then some 
bread and sausage, and actually a box of sardines. 



THE CASTLE 


158 

Now everything was ready ; Frieda, too, had not eaten 
yet, but had waited for K. Two chairs were available, 
there K* and Frieda sat down to their table, the assistants 
at their feet on the dais, but they could never stay 
quiet, even while eating they made a disturbaiice. 
Although they had received an ample store of everything 
and were not yet nearly finished with it, they got up 
from time to time to make sure whether there was still 
anything on the table and they could still expect some- 
thing for themselves ; K. paid no attention to them 
and only began to take notice when Frieda laughed at 
them. He covered her hand with his tenderly and asked 
softly why she was so indulgent to them and treated 
even their naughtinesses so kindly. In this way one 
would never get rid of them, while through a certain 
degree of severity, which besides was demanded by 
their behaviour, one could manage either to curb them 
or, what was both more probable and more desirable, 
to make their position so hot for them that they would 
have finally to leave. The school here didn't seem 
to be a very pleasant place to live in for long, well, it 
wouldn't last very long in any case ; but they would 
hardly notice all the drawbacks if the assistants were 
once gone and they two had the quiet house to them- 
selves ; and didn't she notice, too, that the assistants 
were becoming more impudent every day, as if they 
were actually encouraged now by Frieda's presence and 
the hope that K. wouldn't treat them with such firmness 
as he would have done in other circumstances ? Besides, 
there were probably quite simple means of getting rid 
of them at once, without ceremony, perhaps Frieda 
herself knew of these, seeing that she was so well ac- 
quainted with all the circumstances. And froih all 
appearances one would only be doing the assistants a 



THE CASTLE 


159 

favour if one got rid of them in some way, for the 
advantage they got by staying here couldn't be great, 
and besides the lazy spell which they must have enjoyed 
till now must cease here, to a certain extent at any rate, 
fot they would have to work while Frieda spared herself 
after the excitements of the last few days, and he, K., 
was occupied in finding a way out of their painful 
positioni All the same, if the assistants should go away, he 
would be so relieved that he^elt he could quite easily carry 
out all the school work in addition to his other duties. 

Frieda, who had been listening attentively, stroked 
his arm and said that that was her opinion too, but that 
perhaps he took the assistants' mischief too seriously ; 
they were mere lads, full of spirits and a little silly now 
that they were for the first time in strange service, just 
released from the strict discipline of the Castle, and so a 
little dazed and excited ; and being in that state they 
of course committed lots of follies at which it was 
natural to be annoyed, but which it would be more 
sensible to laugh at. Often she simply couldn't keep 
from laughing. All the same she absolutely agreed 
with K. that it would be much better to send the 
assistants away and be by themselves, just the two of 
them. She pressed closer to K. and hid her face on his 
shoulder. And there she whispered something so low 
that K. had to bend his head to hear ; it was that all 
the same she knew of no way of dealing with the 
assistants and she was afraid that all that K. had 
suggested would be of no avail. So far as she knew it 
was K. himself who had asked for them, and now he 
had them and would have to keep them. It would be 
best to treat them as a joke, which they certainly were ; 
that would be the best way to put up with them. 

K. was displeased by her answer : half in jest, half in 



THE CASTLE 


i6o 

earnest, he replied that she seemed actually to be in 
league with them, or at least to have a strong inclina- 
tion in their favour ; well, they were good-looking lads, 
but there was nobody who couldn't be got rid of if only 
one had the will, and he would show her that that was 
so in the case of the assistants. 

Frieda said that she would be very grateful to him 
if he could manage it. And from now on she wouldn't 
laugh at them any more, noF have any unnecessary talk 
with them. Besides she didn't find anything now to 
laugh at, it was really no joke always to be spied on by 
two men, she had learned to look at the two of them 
with K.'s eyes. And she actually shrank a little when 
the assistants got up again, partly to have a look at 
the food that was left, partly to get at the bottom of the 
continued whispering. 

K. employed this incident to increase Frieda's disgust 
for the assistants, drew her towards him, and so side 
by side they finished their supper. Now it was time to 
go to bed, for they were all very sleepy ; one of the 
assistants had actually fallen asleep over his food ; this 
amused the other one greatly, and he did his best to get 
the others to look at the vacant face of his companion, 
but he had no success. K. and Frieda sat on above 
without paying any attention. The cold was becoming 
so extreme that they shirked going to bed ; at last K. 
declared that the room must be heated, otherwise it 
would be impossible to get to sleep. He looked round 
to see if he could find an axe or something. The 
assistants knew of one and fetched it, and now they 
proceeded to the wood shed. In a few minutes the 
flimsy door was smashed and torn open ; as if they had 
never yet experienced anything so glorious, the assistants 
began to carry the wood into the classroom, hounding 



THE CASTLE 


l6l 

rach other on and knocking against each other ; soon 
there was a great pile, the stove was set going, every- 
body lay down round it, the assistants were given a 
blanket to roll themselves in — it was quite ample for 
them, for it was decided that one of them should always 
remain awake and keep the fire going — and soon it was 
so hot round the stove that the blankets were no longer 
needed, the lamps were put out, and K. and Frieda happily 
stretched themselves out to^sleep in the warm silence. 

K. was awakened during the night by some noise 
or other, and in his first vague sleepy state felt for 
Frieda ; he found that, instead of Frieda, one of the 
assistants was lying beside him. Probably because of 
the exacerbation which being suddenly awakened is 
sufficient in itself to cause, this gave him the greatest 
fright that he had ever had since he first came to the 
village. With a cry he sat up, and not knowing what 
he was doing gave the assistant such a buffet that he 
began to cry. However the whole thing was cleared 
up in a moment. Frieda had been awakened — at 
least so it had seemed to her — by some huge animal, a 
cat probably, which had sprung on to her breast and 
then leapt away again. She had got up and was 
searching the whole room for the beast with a candle. 
One of the assistants had seized the opportunity to 
enjoy the sack of straw for a little, an attempt which he 
was now bitterly repenting. Frieda could find nothing, 
however ; perhaps it had only been a delusion, she 
went back to K. and on the way she stroked the crouch- 
ing and whimpering assistant over the hair to comfort 
him, as if she had forgotten the evening’s conversation. 
K. said nothing, but he asked the assistant to stop 
putting wood on the fire, for owing to almost all the heap 
having been squandered the room was already too hot. 



ibl 


THE CASTLE 


XII 

N ext moming nobody awoke until the school 
children were there, standing with gaping eyes 
round the sleepers. This was unpleasant, for on 
account of the intense heat, which now towards morning 
had given way, however, to a coldness \^hich could be 
felt, they had all taken off everything but their shirts, 
and just as they were beginning to put on their clothes, 
Gisa, the lady teacher, appeared at the door, a fair, tall, 
beautiful, but somewhat stiff young woman. She was 
evidently prepared for the new janitor, and seemed 
also to have been given her instructions by the teacher, 
for as soon as she appeared at the door, she began : 

I can't put up with this. This is a fine state of affairs. 
You have permission to sleep in the classroom, but that's 
all ; I am not obliged to teach in your bedroom. A 
janitor’s family that loll in their beds far into the fore- 
noon ! Faugh I ” Well, something might be said about 
that, particularly as far as the family and the beds were 
concerned, thought K., while with Frieda's help— the 
assistants were of no use, lying on the floor they looked 
in amazement at the lady teacher and the children— 
he dragged across the parallel bars And the vaulting 
horse, threw the blanket over them, and so constructed 
a little room in which one could at least get on one's 
clothes protected from the children’s gaze. He was 
not given a minute's peace, however, for the lady teacher 
began to scold because there was no fresh water in the 
washing basin — K. had just been thinking of fetching the 
basin for himself and Frieda to wash in, but he had at 
once given up the idea so as not to exasperate the lady 



THE CASTLE 


163 

teacher too much, but his renunciation was of no avail, 
for immediately afterwards there was a loud crash ; 
unfortunately, it seemed, they had forgotten to clear 
away the remains of the supper from the teacher's 
table, so she sent it all flying with her ruler and every- 
thing fell on the floor ; she didn't need to bother about 
the sardine oil and the remainder of the coffee being spilt 
and the coffee-pot smashed to pieces, the janitor of 
course could soon clear ijiat up. Clothed once more, 
K. and Frieda, leaning on the parallel bars, witnessed 
the destruction of their few things. The assistants, who 
had obviously never thought of putting on their clothes, 
had stuck their heads through a fold of the blankets 
near the floor, to the great delight of the children. 
What grieved Frieda most was naturally the loss of 
the coffee-pot ; only when K. to comfort her assured 
her that he would go immediately to the village Super- 
intendent and demand that it should be replaced, and 
see that this was done, was she able to gather herself 
together sufficiently to run out of their stockade in her 
chemise and skirt and rescue the table-cover at least 
from being stained any more. And she managed it, 
though the lady teacher to frighten her kept on hammer- 
ing on the table with the ruler in the most nerve- 
racking fashion. When K. and Frieda were quite 
clothed they had to compel the assistants — who seemed 
to be struck dumb by these events — to get their clothes 
on as well : had not merely to order them and push 
them, indeed, but actually to put some of their clothes 
on for them. Then, when all was ready, K. shared out 
the remaining work ; the assistants were to bring in 
wood and light the fire, but in the other classrooms 
first, from which another and greater danger threatened, 
for the teacher himself was probably already there. 



THE CASTLE 


164 

Frieda was to scrub the floor and K. would fetch fresh 
water and set things to rights generally. For the time 
being breakfast could not be thought of. But so as 
to find out definitively the attitude of the lady teacher, 
K. decided to issue from their shelter himself first, the 
others were only to follow when he called them ; he 
adopted this policy on the one hand because he did 
not want the position to be compromised in advance 
by any stupid act of the assistants, and On the other 
because he wanted Frieda to be spared as much as 
possible ; for she had ambitions and he had none, she 
was sensitive and he was not, she only thought of the 
petty discomforts of the moment, while he was thinking 
of Barnabas and the future. Frieda followed all his 
instructions implicitly, and scarcely took her eyes from 
him. Hardly had he appeared when the lady teacher 
aied amid the laughter of the children, which from 
now on never stopped : ** Slept well ? and as K. 

paid no attention — seeing that after all it was not a real 
question — but began to clear up the washstand, she 
asked : ** What have you been doing to my cat ? ” A 
huge, fat old cat was lying lazily outstretched on the 
table, and the teacher was examining one of its paws 
which was evidently a little hurt. So Frieda had been 
right after all, this cat had not of course leapt on her, 
for it was past the leaping stage, but it had crawled 
over her, had been terrified by the presence of people 
in the empty house, had concealed itself hastily, and in 
its unaccustomed hurry had hurt itself. K. tried to 
explain this quietly to the lady teacher, but the only 
thing she had eyes for was the injury itself and she 
replied : “ Well, then it's your fault through coming 
here. Just look at this," and she called K. over to the 
table, showed him the paw, and before he could get a 





THE CASTLE 


165 

proper look at it, gave him a whack with the tawse 
over the back of his hand ; the tails of the tawse were 
blunted, it was true, but, this time witliout any regard 
for the cat, she had brought them down so sharply that 
they raised bloody weals. And now go about your 
business,*' she said impatiently, bowing herself once 
more over the cat. Frieda, who had been looking on 
with the assistants from behind the parallel bars, cried 
out when shfe saw the bictod. K. held up his hand in 
front of the children and said : Look, that's what a 

sly, wicked cat has done to me." He said it, indeed, 
not for the children's benefit, whose shouting and 
laughter had become continuous, so that it needed no 
further occasion or incitement, and could not be pierced 
or influenced by any words of his. But seeing tliat the 
lady teacher, too, only acknowledged the insult by a 
brief side-glance, and remained still occupied with the 
cat, her first fury satiated by the drawing of blood, K. 
called Frieda and the assistants, and the work began. 

When K. had carried out the pail with the dirty 
water, fetched fresh water, and was beginning to turn 
out the classroom, a boy of about twelve stepped out 
from his desk, touched K.'s hand, and said something 
which was quite lost in the general uproar. Then 
suddenly every sound ceased and K. turned round. 
The thing he had been fearing all morning had come. 
In the door stood the teacher ; in each hand the little 
man held an assistant by the scruff of the neck. He 
had caught them, it seemed, while they were fetching 
wood, for in a mighty voice he began to shout, pausing 
after every word : " Who has dared to break into the 
wood-shed ? Where is the villain, so that I may annihi- 
late him ? " Then Frieda got up from the floor, which 
she was trying to clean near the feet of the lady teacher, 



i66 


THE CASTLE 


looked across at K. as if she were trying to gather 
strength from him, and said, a little of her old super- 
ciliousness in her glance and bearing ; “ I did it, Mr. 
Teacher. I couldn't think of any other way. If the 
classrooms were to be heated in time, the wood-shed 
had to be opened ; I didn’t dare to ask you for the key 
in the middle of the night, my fianc^ was at the Herren- 
hof, it was possible that he might stay there all night, so 
I had to decide for myself. “If I have dcITne wrongly, 
forgive my inexperience ,* I've been scolded enough 
already by my fianc^, after he saw what had happened. 
Yes, he even forbade me to light the fires early, because 
he thought that you had shown by locking the wood- 
shed that you didn't want them to be put on before 
you came yourself. So it's his fault that the fires are 
not on, but mine that the shed has been broken into." 
" Who broke open the door ? " asked the teacher, turn- 
ing to the assistants, who were still vainly struggling 
to escape from his grip. " The gentleman," they both 
replied, and, so that there might be no doubt, pointed 
at K. Frieda laughed, and her laughter seemed to be 
still more conclusive than her words ; then she began 
to wring out into the pail the rag with which she had 
been SCTubbing the floor, as if the episode had been 
closed with her declaration, and the evidence of the 
assistants were merely a belated jest. Only when she 
was at work on her knees again did she add : " Our 
assistants are mere children who in spite of their age 
should still be at their desks in school. Last evening I 
really did break open the door myself with the axe, it 
was quite easy, I didn’t need the assistants to help me, 
they would only have been a nuisance. But when my 
fianc<J arrived later in the night and went out to see the 
damage and if possible put it right, the assistants ran 





THE CASTLE 


167 

out after him, likely becatise they were afraid to stay 
here by themselves, and saw my fianc^ working at 
the broken door, and that’s why they say now — but 

they’re only children ” True, the assistants kept 

on shaking their heads during Frieda’s story, pointed 
again at K. and did their best by means of dumb show 
to deflect her from her story ; but as they did not 
succeed they submitted at last, took Frieda's words as a 
command, and on being qu«tioned anew by the teacher 
made no reply. ** So,” said the teacher, ” you’ve been 
lying ? Or at least you’ve groundlessly accused the 
janitor ? ” They still remained silent, but their 
trembling and their apprehensive glances seemed to 
indicate guilt. ” Then I’ll give you a sound thrashing 
straight away,” he said, and he sent one of the children 
into the next room for his cane. Then as he was raising 
it, Frieda cried ; ” The assistants have told the truth ! ” 
flung her scrubbing-cloth in despair into the pail, so 
that the water splashed up on every side, and ran 
behind the parallel bars, where she remained concealed. 
” A lying crew ! ” remarked the lady teacher, who had 
just finished bandaging the paw, and she took the beast 
into her lap, for which it was almost too big. 

” So it WiU the janitor,” said the teacher, pushing 
the assistants away and turning to K., who had been 
listening all the time leaning on the handle of his 
broom : ” This fine janitor who out of cowardice 

allows other people to be falsely accused of his own 
villainies.” ” Well,” said K., who had not missed the 
fact that Frieda's intervention had appeased the first 
uncontrollable fury of the teacher, ” if the assistants 
had got a little taste of the rod I shouldn't have been 
sorry ; if they get off ten times when they should justly 
be punished, they can well afford to pay for it by being 



THE CASTLE 


l68 

punished unjustly for once* But besides that it would 
have been very welcome to me if a direct quarrel 
between me and you, Mr. Teacher, could have been 
avoided ,* perhaps you would have liked it as well 
yourself too. But seeing that Frieda has sacrificed me 

to the assistants now " here K. paused, and in the 

silence Frieda's sobs could be heard behind the screen 
— ** of course a clean breast must be made of the whole 
business," " Scandalous I "• said the ladj^ teacher. " I 
am entirely of your opinion, Fraulein Gisa," said the 
teacher. "You, janitor, are of course dismissed from 
your post for those scandalous doings. Your further 
punishment I reserve meantime, but now clear yourself 
and your belongings out of the house at once. It will 
be a genuine relief to us, and the teaching will manage 
to begin at last. Now quick about it I " " I shan't 

move a foot from here," said K. " You're my superior, 
but not the person who engaged me for this post ; it 
was the Superintendent who did that, and I'll only 
accept notice from him. And he certainly never gave 
me this post so that I and my dependents should freeze 
here, but — as you told me yourself — to keep me from 
doing anything thoughtless or desperate. To dismiss 
me suddenly now would therefore be absolutely against 
his intentions ; till I hear the contrary from his own 
mouth I refuse to believe it. Besides it may possibly be 
greatly to your own advantage, too, if I don't accept 
your notice, given so hastily." " So you don't accept 
it ? " asked the teacher. K. shook his head. " Think 
it over carefully," said the teacher, " your decisions 
aren't always for the best ; you should reflect, for 
instance, on yesterday afternoon, when you refused to 
be examined." " Why do you bring that up now ? 
asked K. " Because it's my whim." replied the teacher, 



THE CASTLE 


169 

and now I repeat for the last time, get out ! But 
as that too had no effect the teacher went over to the 
table and consulted in a whisper with Fraulein Gisa ; 
she said something about the police, but the teacher 
rejected it, finally they seemed in agreement, the teacher 
ordered the children to go into his classroom, they 
would be taught there along with the other children. 
This change delighted everybody, the room was emptied 
in a momenf amid laughter and shouting, the teacher 
and Fraulein Gisa followed last. The latter carried the 
class register, and on it in all its bulk the perfectly in- 
different cat. The teacher would gladly have left the 
cat behind, but a suggestion to that effect was negatived 
decisively by Fraulein Gisa with a reference to K.'s 
inhumanity. So, in addition to all his other annoy- 
ances, the teacher blamed K. for the cat as well. And 
that influenced his last words to K., spoken when he 
reached the door : The lady has been driven by force 
to leave the room with her children, because you have 
rebelliously refused to accept my notice, and because 
nobody can ask of her, a young girl, that she should 
teach in the middle of your dirty household affairs. 
So you are left to yourself, and you can spread yourself 
as much as you like, undisturbed by the disapproval of 
respectable people. But it won't last for long, I promise 
you that." With that he slammed the door. 


XIII 

H ardly was everybody gone when K. said to the 
assistants : " Clear out I " Disconcerted by the 
unexpectedness of the command, they obeyed, but 
when K. locked the door behind them they tried to get 



THE CASTLE 


170 

in again, whimpered outside and knocked on the door. 
" You are dismissed," cried K., " never again will I 
take you into my service I " But that, of course, was 
just what they did not want, and they kept hammering 
on the door with their hands and feet. " Let us back 
to you, sir ! " they cried, as if they were being swept 
away by a flood and K. were dry land. But K. did not 
relent, he waited impatiently for the unbearable din to 
force the teacher to intervene. That socJn happened. 
" Let your confounded assistants in ! " he shouted. 
" Tve dismissed them," K. shouted back ; it had the 
incidental effect of showing the teacher what it was to 
be strong enough not merely to give notice, but to 
enforce it. The teacher next tried to soothe the assist- 
ants by kindly assurances that they had only to wait 
quietly and K. would have to let them in sooner or 
later. Then he went away. And now things might 
have settled down if K. had not begun to shout at them 
again that they weie finally dismissed once and for all, 
and had not the faintest chance of being taken back. 
Upon that they recommenced their din. Once more 
the teacher entered, but this time he no longer tried to 
reason with them, but drove them, apparently with his 
dreaded rod, out of the house. 

Soon they appeared in front of the windows of the 
gymnasium, rapped on the panes and cried something, 
but their words could no longer be distinguished. They 
did not stay there long either, in the deep snow they 
could not be as active as their frenzy required. So 
they flew to the railings of the school garden and sprang 
on to the stone pediment, where, moreover, though 
only from a distance, they had a better view of the 
room ; there they ran to and fro holding on to the 
railings, then remained standing and stretched out 



THE CASTLE 


171 

their clasped hands beseechingly towards K. They 
went on like this for a long time, without thinking of 
the uselessness of their efforts ; they were as if obsessed, 
they did not even stop when K. drew down the window 
blinds so as to rid himself of the sight of them. In the 
now darkened room K. went over to the parallel bars 
to look for Frieda. On encountering his gaze she got 
up, put her hair in order, dried her tears and began in 
silence to prefare the coffefe. Although she knew of 
everything, K. formally announced to her all the same 
that he had dismissed the assistants. She merely nodded. 
K. sat down at one of the desks and followed her tired 
movements. It had been her unfailing liveliness and 
decision that had given her insignificant physique its 
beauty ; now that beauty was gone. A few days of 
living with K. had been enough to achieve this. Her 
work in the taproom had not been light, but apparently 
it had been more suited to her. Or was her separation 
from Klamm the real cause of her falling away ? It 
was the nearness of Klamm that had made her so irra- 
tionally seductive ; that was the seduction which had 
drawn K. to her, and now she was withering in his arms. 

'' Frieda,'' said K. She put away the coffee-uiill at 
^ once and went over to K. at his desk. “ You're angry 
with me ? " asked she. “ No," replied K. " I don't 
think you can help yourself. You were happy in the 
Herrenhof. I should have let you stay there." " Yes," 
said Frieda, gazing sadly in front of her, " you should 
have let me stay there. I'm not good enough for you 
to live with. If you were rid of me, perhaps you 
would be able to achieve all that you want. Out of 
regard for me you've submitted yourself to the tyranny 
of the teacher, taken on this wretched post, and are 
doing your utmost to get an interview with Klamm. 



172 


THE CASTLE 


All for me, but I don't give you much in return." " No, 
no," said K., putting his arm round her comfortingly. 
" All these things are trifles that don't hurt me, and 
it's not only on your account that I want to get to Klamm. 
And then think of all you've done for me ! Before I 
knew you I was going about in a blind circle. Nobody 
took me up, and if I made up to anybody I was soon 
sent about my business. And when I was given the 
chance of a little hospitality it was with people that I 
always wanted to run away from, like Barnabas's 

family " "You wanted to run away from them? 

You did ? Darling I " cried Frieda eagerly, and after 
a hesitating " Yes," from K., sank back once more 
into her apathy. But K. had no longer resolution 
enough to explain in what way everything had changed 
for the better for him through his connection with 
Frieda. He slowly took away his arm and they sat for 
a little in silence, until — as if his arm had given her 
warmth and comfort, which now she could not do with- 
out — Frieda said ; "I won't be able to stand this life 
here. If you want to keep me with you, we'll have to 
go away somewhere or other, to the south of France, 
or to Spain." " I can't go away," replied K. "I came 
here to stay. I'll stay here." And giving utterance to 
a self-contradiction which he made no effort to explain, 
he added as if to himself: " What could have enticed 
me to this desolate country except the wish to stay here ? * ' 
Then he went on : " But you want to stay here too, 
after all it's your own country. Only you miss Klamm 
and that gives you desperate ideas." " I miss Klamm ? " 
said Frieda, " I've all I want of Klamm here, too 
much Klamm ; it’s to escape from him that I want 
to go away. It’s not Klamm that I miss, it's you. 
I want to go away for your sake, because I can't get 



THE CASTLE 


173 

enough of you, here where everything distracts me. 
I would gladly lose my pretty lool«, I would gladly be 
sick and ailing, if I could be left in peace with you/' 
K. had only paid attention to one thing. ** Then 
Klamm is still in communication with you ? he 
asked eagerly, “ he sends for you ? “I know nothing 
about Klamm," replied Frieda, " I was speaking just 
now of others, I mean the assistants." " Oh, the 
assistants," said K. in disappointment, " do they 
persecute you ? " " Why, have you never noticed it ? " 

cihked Frieda. " No," replied K., trying in vain to 
remember anything, " they're certainly importunate 
and lascivious young fellows, but I hadn't noticed that 
they had dared to lift their eyes to you." " No ? " said 
Frieda, " did you never notice that they simply weren't 
to be driven out of our room in the Bridge Inn, that 
they jealously watched all our movements, that one of 
them finished up by taking my place on that sack of 
straw, that they gave evidence against you a minute 
ago so as to drive you out of this and ruin you, and so 
as to be left alone with me ? You've never noticed all 
that ? " K. gazed at Frieda without replying. Her 
accusations against the assistants were true enough, but 
all the same they could be interpreted far more in- 
nocently as simple effects of the ludicrously childish, 
irresponsible, and undisciplined characters of the two. 
And didn't it also speak against their guilt that they 
had always done their best to go with K. everywhere 
and not to be left with Frieda ? K. half-suggested this. 
“ It's their deceit," said Frieda, " have you never seen 
through it ? Well, why have you driven them away, 
if not for those reasons ? " And she went to the window, 
drew the blind aside a little, glanced out, and then called 
K. over. The assistants were still clinging to tlie rail- 



THE CASTLE 


174 

ings ; tired as they must have been by now, they still 
gathered their strength together every now and then 
and stretched their arms out beseechingly towards the 
school. So as not to have to hold on all the time, one 
of them had hooked himself on to the railings behind 
by the tail of his coat. 

“ Poor things ! Poor things I ** said Frieda. 

You ask why I drove them away ? ** asked K. 
** You were the sole caus.^ of that.*' I ? " asked 
Frieda without taking her eyes from the assistants. 
“ Your much too kind treatment of the assistants," 
said K., “ the way you forgave their offences and smiled 
at them and stroked their hair, your perpetual sym- 
pathy for them — * Poor things ! Poor things ! * you said 
just now — and finally this last thing that has happened, 
that you haven't scrupled even to sacrifice me to save 
the assistants from a beating." " Yes, that's just it, 
that's what I've been trying to tell you, that's just 
what makes me unhappy, what keeps me from you 
even though I can't think of any greater happiness 
than to be with you all the time, without interruption, 
endlessly, even though I feel that here in this world 
there's no undisturbed place for our love, neither in the 
village nor anywhere else ; and I dream of a grave, 
deep and narrow, where we could clasp each other in 
our arms as with iron bars, and I would hide my face 
in you and you would hide your face in me, and nobody 
would ever see us any more. But here — look, there are 
the assistants ! It's not you they think of when they 
clasp their hands, but me." " And it's not I who am 
looking at them," said K., " but you." " Certainly, 
me," said Frieda almost angrily, " that's what I've been 
saying all the time ; why else should they be always 
at my heels, even if they are messengers of Klamm's ? ' 



THE CASTLE 


175 

“ Messengers of Klamm's ? " repeated K. extremely 
astonished by this designation, though it seemed natural 
enough at the same time. ‘‘ Certainly, messengers of 
Klamm's," said Frieda. " Even if they are, still they're 
silly boys, too, who need to have more sense hammered 
into them. What ugly black young demons they are, 
and how disgusting the contrast is between their faces, 
which one would say belonged to grown-ups, almost 
to students, •and their silly childish behaviour. Do you 
think I don't see that ? It makes me feel ashamed for 
them. Well, that's just it, they don't repel me, but 
I feel ashamed for them. I can't help looking at them. 
When one ought to be annoyed with them, I can only 
laugh at them. When people want to strike them, I can 
only stroke their hair. And when I'm lying beside you 
at night I can't sleep and must always be leaning across 
you to look at them, one of them lying rolled up asleep 
in the blanket and the other kneeling before the stove 
door putting in wood, and I have to bend forward so 
far that I nearly waken you. And it wasn't the cat 
that frightened me — oh, I've had experience of cats and 
I've had experience as well of disturbed nights in the 
taproom — it wasn't the cat that frightened me, I'm 
frightened at myself. No, it didn't need that big beast 
of a cat to waken me, I start up at the slightest noise. 
One minute I'm afraid you'll waken and spoil every- 
thing, and the next I spring up and light the candle to 
force you to waken at once and protect me." " I knew 
nothing of all this," said K., "it was only a vague 
suspicion of it that made me send them away ; but now 
they're gone, and perhaps everything will be all right." 
“ Yes, they're gone at last," said Frieda, but her face 
was worried, not happy, " only we don't know who 
they are. Messengers of Klamm's I call them in my 



THE CASTLE 


176 

mind, though not seriously, but perhaps they are really 
that. Their eyes — those ingenuous and yet flashing 
eyes—remind me somehow of Klamm's ; yes, that's it, 
it's Klamm's glance that sometimes runs through me 
from their eyes. And so it's not true when I say that 
I'm ashamed for them. I only wish it were. I know 
quite well that anywhere else and in anyone else their 
behaviour would seem stupid and offensive, but in 
them it isn't. I watch their cstupid tricks with respect 
and admiration. But if they're Klamm's messengers 
who'll rid us of them ? and besides would it be a good 
thing to be rid of them ? Wouldn't you have to fetch 
them back at once in that case and be happy if they 
were still willing to come ? " “You want me to bring 
them back again ? '' asked K. “ No, no ! '' said Frieda, 
“ it's the last thing I desire. The sight of them, if they 
were to rush in here now, their joy at seeing me again, 
the way they would hop round like children and stretch 
out their arms to me like men ; no, I don't think I 
would be able to stand that. But all the same when 
I remember that if you keep on hardening your heart 
to them, it will keep you, perhaps, from ever getting 
admittance to Klamm, I want to save you by any 
means at all from such consequences. In that case 
my only wish is for you to let them in. In that case let 
them in now at once. Don't bother about me ; what 
do I matter ? I'll defend myself as long as I can, but 
if I have to surrender, then I'll surrender with the 
consciousness that that, too, is for your sake." “You 
only strengthen me in my decision about the assistants," 
said K. “ Never will they come in with my will. The 
fact that I've got them out of this proves at least that 
in certain circumstances they can be managed, and 
therefore, in addition, that they have no real connection 


A. 



THE CASTLE 


177 

with Klamm. Only last night I received a letter from 
Klamm from which it was dear that Klamm was quite 
falsely informed about the assistants, from which again 
one can only draw the conclusion that he is completely 
indifferent to them, for if that were not so he would 
certainly have obtained exact information about them. 
And the fact that you see Klamm in them proves 
nothing, for you’re still, unfortunately, under the land- 
lady’s influence and see Klamm everywhere. You're 
still Klamm's sweetheart, and not my wife yet by a long 
chalk. Sometimes that makes me quite dejected, I feel 
then as if I had lost everything, I feel as if I had only 
newly come to the village, yet not full of hope, as I 
actually came, but with the knowledge that only dis- 
appointments await me, and that I will have to swallow 
them down one after another to the very dregs. But 
that is only sometimes," K. added smiling, when he 
saw Frieda's dejection at hearing his words, " and at 
bottom it merely proves one good thing, that is, how 
much you mean to me. And if you order me now to 
choose between you and the assistants, that's enough 
to decide the assistants' fate. What an idea, to choose 
between you and the assistants I But now I want to be 
rid of them finally, in word and thought as well. Besides 
who knows whether the weakness that has come over 
us both mayn't be due to the fact that we haven't 
had breakfast yet ? " ** That's possible," said Frieda, 

smiling wearily and going about her work. K., too, 
grasped the broom again. 

After a while there was a soft rap at the door. 
“ Barnabas I " cried K., throwing down the broom, 
and with a few steps he was at the door. Frieda stared 
at him, more terrified at the name than anything else. 
With his trembling hands K. could not turn the old 



THE CASTLE 


178 

lock immediately. Til open in a minute/' he kept 
on repeating, instead of asking who was actually there. 
And then he had to face the fact that through the wide- 
open door came in, not Barnabas, but the little boy who 
had tried to speak to him before. But K. had no wish 
to be reminded of him. “ What do you want here ? ” 
he asked. “ The classes are being taught next door." 
" Tve come from there/' replied the boy, looking up at 
K. quietly with his great bw)wn eyes, and standing at 
attention, with his arms by his side. " What do you 
want then ? Out with it ! " said K., bending a little 
forward, for the boy spoke in a low voice. " Can I 
help you ? " asked the boy. " He wants to help us," 
said K. to Frieda, and then to the boy : " What's your 
name ? " " Hans Brunswick," replied the boy, " fourth 
standard, son of Otto Brunswick, master cobbler in 
Madeleinegasse." " I see, your name is Brunswick," 
said K., now in a kinder tone. It came out that Hans 
had been so indignant at seeing the bloody weals which 
the lady teacher had raised on K.'s hand, that he had 
resolved at once to stand by K. He had boldly slipped 
away just now from the classroom next door at the risk 
of severe punishment, somewhat as a deserter goes over 
to the enemy. It may indeed have been chiefly some 
such boyish fancy that had impelled him. The serious- 
ness which he evinced in everything he did seemed to 
indicate it. Shyness held him back at the beginning, 
but he soon got used to K. and Frieda, and when he 
was given a cup of good hot coffee he became lively 
and confidential and began to question them eagerly 
and insistently, as if he wanted to know the gist of the 
matter as quickly as possible, to enable him to come to 
an independent decision about what they should do. 
There was something imperious in his character, but 



THE CASTLE 


179 

it was so mingled with childish innocence that they 
submitted to it without resistance, half-smilingly, half 
in earnest. In any case he demanded all their attention 
for himself ; work completely stopped, the breakfast 
lingered on unconscionably. Although Hans was sitting 
at one of the scholars* desks and K. in a chair on the 
dais with Frieda beside him, it looked as if Hans were 
the teacher, and as if he were examining them and 
passing judgment on their# answers. A faint smile round 
his soft mouth seemed to indicate that he knew quite 
well that all this was only a game, but that made him 
only the more serious in conducting it ; perhaps, too, it 
was not really a smile but the happiness of childhood 
that played round his lips. Strangely enough he only 
admitted quite late in the conversation that he had 
known K, ever since his visit to Lasemann*s. K. was 
delighted. ** You were playing at the lady's feet ? " 
asked K. ** Yes," replied Hans, " that was my mother." 
And now he had to tell about his mother, but he did 
so hesitatingly and only after being repeatedly asked ; 
and it was clear now that he was only a child, out of 
whose mouth, it is true — especially in his questions — 
sometimes the voice of an energetic, far-seeing man 
seemed to speak ; but then all at once, without transi- 
tion, he was only a schoolboy again who did not under- 
stand many of the questions, misconstrued others, and 
in childish inconsiderateness spoke too low, although 
he had the fault repeatedly pointed out to him, and out 
of stubbornness silently refused to answer some of the 
other questions at all, quite without embarrassment, 
however, as a grown-up would have been incapable of 
doing. He seemed to feel that he alone had the right 
to ask questions, and that by the questions of Frieda 
and K. some regulation were broken and time wasted. 



THE CASTLE 


i8o 

That made him sit silent for a long time, his body 
erect, his head bent, his underlip pushed out Frieda 
was so charmed by his expression at these moments 
that she sometimes put questions to him in the hope 
that they would evoke it. And she succeeded several 
times, but K. was only annoyed. All that they found 
out did not amount to much. Hans's mother was 
slightly unwell, but what her illness was remained in- 
definite ; the child which slv had had in <her lap was 
Hans's sister and was called Frieda (Hans was not 
pleased by the fact that her name was the same as the 
lady's who was questioning him), the family lived in the 
village, but not with Lasemann — they had only been 
there on a visit and to be bathed, seeing that Lasemann 
had the big tub in which the younger children, to 
whom Hans didn't belong, loved to bathe and splash 
about. Of his father Hans spoke now with respect, 
now with fear, but only when his mother was not 
occupying the conversation ; compared with his mother 
his father evidently was of little account, but all their 
questions about Brunswick's family life remained, in 
spite of their efforts, unanswered. K. learned that the 
father had the biggest shoemaker's business in the 
place, nobody could compete with him, a fact which 
quite remote questions brought again and again ; 
he actually gave out work to the other shoemakers, 
for example to Barnabas's father ; in this last case he 
had done it of course as a special favour — at least Hans's 
proud toss of the head seemed to hint at this, a gesture 
which made Frieda run over and give him a kiss. The 
question whether he had been in the Castle yet he only 
answered after it had been repeated several times, and 
with a “ No ". The same question regarding his mother 
he did not answer at all. At last K. grew tired ; to him. 



Itm 


I6I 


too, these questions seemed useless, he admitted that 
the boy was right ; besides there was something 
humiliating in ferreting out family secrets by taking 
advantage of a child ; doubly humiliating, however, 
was the fact that in spite of his effort she had learned 
nothing. And when to finish the matter he asked the 
boy what was the help he wanted to offer, he was no 
longer surprised to hear that Hans had only wanted 
to help with the work* in the school, so that the 
teacher and his assistant might not scold K. so much. 
K. explained to Hans that help of that kind was not 
needed, scolding was part of the teacher's nature and 
one could scarcely hope to avoid it even by the greatest 
diligence, the work itself was not hard, and only because 
of special circumstances had it been so far behind that 
jnorning, besides scolding hadn't the same effect on K. 
as on a scholar, he shook it off, it was almost a matter 
of indifference to him, he hoped, too, to get quite clear 
of the teacher soon. Though Hans had only wanted 
to help him in dealing with the teacher, however, he 
thanked him sincerely, but now Hans had better return 
to his class, with luck he would not be punished if he 
went back at once. Although K. did not emphasise 
and only involuntarily suggested that it was simply 
help in dealing with the teacher which he did not 
require, leaving the question of other kinds of help 
open, Hans caught the suggestion clearly and asked 
whether perhaps K. needed any other assistance ; he 
would be very glad to help him, and if he were not in 
a position to help him himself, he would ask his mother 
to do so, and then it would be sure to be all right. 
When his father had difficulties, he, too, asked Hans's 
mother for help. And his mother had already asked 
once about K., she herself hardly ever left the house, it 



THE CASTLE 


182 

had been a great exception for her to be at Lasemann's 
that day. But he, Hans, often went there to play with 
Lasemann's children, and his mother had once asked 
him whether the Land Surveyor had ever happened to 
be there again. Only his mother wasn't supposed to 
talk too much, seeing she was so weak and tired, and 
so he had simply replied that he hadn't seen the Land 
Surveyor there, and nothing more had been said ; but 
when he had found K. here in the school, lie had had 
to speak to him, so that he might tell his mother the 
news. For that was what pleased his mother most, 
when without her express command one did what she 
wanted. After a short pause for reflection K. said that 
he did not need any help, he had all that he required, 
but it was very good of Hans to want to help him, and 
he thanked him for his good intentions ; it was possible 
that later he might be in need of something and then 
he would turn to Hans, he had his address. In return 
perhaps he, K., might be able to offer a little help ; he 
was sorry to hear that Hans's mother was ill and that 
apparently nobody in the village understood her illness ; 
if it was neglected like that a trifling malady might 
sometimes lead to grave consequences. Now he, K., 
had some medical knowledge, and, what was of still 
more value, experience in treating sick people. Many 
a case which the doctors had given up he had been 
able to cure. At home they had called him “ The 
Bitter Herlp " on account of his healing poWers. In 
any case he would be glad to see Hans's mother and 
speak with her. Perhaps he might be able to give 
her good advice, for if only for Hans's sake he would 
be delighted to do it. At &st Hans's eyes lit up at this 
offer, exciting K. to greater urgency, but the outcome 
was unsatisfactory, for to several questions Hans re- 



THE CASTLE 


183 

plied, without showing the slightest trace of regret, 
that no stranger was allowed to visit his mother, she 
had to be guarded so carefully ; although that day K, 
had scarcely spoken to her she had had to stay for 
several days in bed, a thing indeed that often happened. 
But his father had then been very angry with K. and 
he would certainly never allow K. to come to the 
house ; he had actually wanted to seek K. out at the 
time to punish him for his impudence, only Hans's 
mother had held him back. But in any case his mother 
never wanted to talk with anybody whatever, and her 
enquiry about K. was no exception to the rule ; on 
the contrary, seeing he had been mentioned, she could 
have expressed the wish to see him, but she hadn't done 
so, and in that had clearly made known her will. She 
only wanted to hear about K. but she did not want 
to speak to him. Besides it wasn't any real illness that 
she was suffering from, she knew quite well the cause 
of her state and often had actually indicated it ; appar- 
ently it was the climate here that she could not stand, 
but all the same she would not leave the place, on 
account of her husband and children, besides, she was 
already better in health than she used to be. Here K. 
felt Hans's powers of thought visibly increasing in his 
attempt to protect his mother from K., from K. whom 
he had ostensibly wanted to help ; yes, in the good 
cause of keeping K. away from his mother he even 
contradicted in several respects what he had said before, 
particularly in regard to his mother's illness. Never- 
theless K. marked that even so Hans was still well 
disposed towards him, only when his mother was in 
question he forgot everything else ; whoever was set 
up beside his mother was immediately at a disadvantage ; 
)ust now it had been K., but it could as well be his 



THE CASTLE 


184 

father, for example. K. wanted to test this supposition 
and said that it was certainly thoughtful of Hans's 
father to shield his mother from any disturbance, and 
if he, K., had only guessed that day at this state of 
things, he would never have thought of venturing to 
speak to her, and he asked Hans to make his apologies 
to her now. On the other hand he could not quite 
understand why Hans's father, seeing that the cause of 
her sickness was so clearly Jcnown as H*is said, kept 
her back from going somewhere else to get well ; one 
had to infer that he kept her back, for she only remained 
on his account and the children's, but she could take 
the children with her, and she need not have to go 
away for any long time or for any great distance, even 
up on the Castle Hill the air was quite different. 
Hans’s father had no need to fear the cost of the holiday, 
seeing that he was the biggest shoemaker in the place, 
and it was pretty certain that he or she had relations 
or acquaintances in the Castle who would be glad to 
take her in. Why did he not let her go ? He shouldn't 
underestimate an illness like this, K. had only seen 
Hans's mother for a minute, but it had actually been 
her striking pallor and weakness that had impelled him 
to speak to her. Even at that time he had been sur- 
prised that her husband had let her sit there in the 
damp steam of the washing and bathing when she was 
ill, and had put no restraint either on his loud talk 
with the others. Hans's father really did not know the 
actual state of things ; even if her illness had improved 
in the last few weeks, illnesses like that had ups and 
downs, and in the end, if one did not fight them, they 
returned with redoubled strength, and then the patient 
was past help. Even if K. could not speak to Hans's 
mother, still it would perhaps be advisable if he were 



THE CASTLE 


185 

to speak to his father and draw his attention to all this. 

Hans had listened intently, had understood most of 
it, and had been deeply impressed by the threat implicit 
in this dark advice. Nevertheless he replied that K. 
could not speak to his father, for his father disliked him 
and would probably treat him as the teacher had done. 
He said this with a shy smile when he was speaking of 
K., but sadly and bitterly when he mentioned his father. 
But he added that perhapa K. might be able to speak 
to his mother all the same, but only without his father's 
knowledge. Then deep in thought Hans stared in ftont 
of him for a little — just like a woman who wants to do 
something forbidden and seeks an opportunity to do it 
without being punished — ^and said that the day after 
to-morrow it might be possible, his father was going to 
the Herrenhof in the evening, he had a conference there ; 
then he, Hans, would come in the evening and take K. 
along to his mother, of course, assuming that his mother 
agreed, which was however very improbable. She 
never did anything at all against the wishes of his father, 
she submitted to him in everything, even in things whose 
unreasonableness he, Hans, could see through. 

Long before this K. had called Hans up to the dais, 
drawn him between his knees, and had kept on caressing 
him comfortingly. The nearness helped, in spite of Hans's 
occasional recalcitrance, to bring about an understand- 
ing. They agreed finally to the following : Hans would 
first tell his mother the entire truth, but, so as to make 
her consent easier, add that K. wanted to speak to Bruns- 
wick himself as well, not about her at all, but about his 
own affairs. Besides this was true ; in the course of the 
conversation K. had remembered that Brunswick, even 
if he were a bad and dangerous man, could scarcely be 
his enemy now, if he had been, according to the informa- 



THE CASTLE 


l86 

tion of the Superintendent, the leader of those who, 
even if only on political grounds, were in favour of 
engaging a Land Surveyor. K.'s arrival in the village 
must therefore have been welcomed by Brunswick. But 
in that case his morose greeting that first day and the 
dislike of which Hans spoke were almost incompre- 
hensible — perhaps, however, Brunswick had been hurt 
simply because K. had not turned to him first for help, 
perhaps there existed some other misifliderstanding 
which could be cleared up by a few words. But if that 
were done K. might very well secure in Brunswick a 
supporter against the teacher, yes and against the Super- 
intendent as well ; the whole olEcial plot — for was it 
anything else really ? — by means of which the Super- 
intendent and the teacher were keeping him from reach- 
ing the Castle authorities and had driven him into taking 
a janitor's post, might be unmasked ; if it came anew 
to a fight about K. between Brunswick and the Super- 
intendent, Brunswick would have to include K. on his 
side, K. would become a guest in Brunswick's house, 
Brunswick's fighting resources would be put at his dis- 
posal in spite of the Superintendent ; who could tell 
what he might not be able to achieve by those means, 
and in any case he would often be in the lady's company 
— so he played with his dreams and they with him, while 
Hans, thinking only of his mother, painfully watched 
K.'s silence, as one watches a doctor who is sunk in 
reflection while he tries to find the proper remedy for a 
grave case. With K.'s proposal to speak to Brunswick 
about his post as Land Surveyor Hans was in agreement, 
but only because by means of this his mother would be 
shielded from his father, and because in any case it was 
only a last resort which with good luck might not be 
needed. He merely asked further how K. was to explain 



THE CASTLE 


187 

f to his father the lateness of the visit, and was content 
at last, though his face remained a little overcast, with 
the suggestion that K. would say that his unendurable 
post in the school and the teacher's humiliating treat- 
, ment had made him in sudden despair forget all caution. 

Now that, so far as one could see, everything had been 
provided for, and the possibility of success at least con- 
ceded, Hans, freed from his burden of reflection, became 
happier, and chatted for some time longer with K, and 
afterwards with Frieda — who had sat for a long time 
as if absorbed by quite different thoughts, and only now 
began to take part in the conversation again. Among 
^ other things she asked him what he wanted to become ; 
he did not think long but said he wanted to be a man 
like K. When he was asked next for his reasons he really 
did not know how to reply, and the question whether 
he would like to be a janitor he answered with a decided 
negative. Only through further questioning did they 
perceive by what roundabout ways he had arrived at his 
wish. K.'s present condition was in no way enviable, 
but wretched and humiliating ; even Hans saw this 
clearly without having to ask other people ; he himself 
would have certainly preferred to shield his mother 
from K.'s slightest word, even from having to see him. 
In spite of this, however, he had come to K. and had 
begged to be allowed to help him, and had been de- 
liglited when K. agreed ; he imagined, too, that other 
people felt the same ; and, most important of all, it had 
been his mother herself who had mentioned K.'s name. 
These contradictions had engendered in him the belief 
that though for the moment K. was wretched and looked 
down on, yet in an almost unimaginable and distant 
iuture he would excel everybody. And it was just this 
•absurdly distant future and the glorious developments 



THE CASTLE 


l88 

which were to lead up to it that attracted Hans ; that 
was why he was willing to accept K. even in his present 
state* The peculiar childish-grown-up acuteness of this 
wish consisted in the fact that Hans looked on K. as on 
a younger brother whose future would reach further ^ 
than his own, the future of a very little boy. And it 
was with an almost troubled seriousness that, driven 
into a corner by Frieda's questions, he at last confessed 
those things. K. only cheered him up •again when he 
said that he knew what Hans envied him for ; it was 
for his beautiful walking-stick, which was lying on the 
table and with which Hans had been playing absently 
during the conversation. Now K. knew how to pro-^ 
duce sticks like that, and if their plan were successful he 
would make Hans an even more beautiful one. It was 
no longer quite clear now whether Hans had not really 
meant merely the walking-stick, so happy was he made 
by K/s promise ; and he said good-bye with a glad face, 
not without pressing K.'s hand firmly and saying : The 
day after to-morrow, then." 

It had been high time for Hans to go, for shortly after- 
wards the teacher flung open the door and shouted when 
he saw K. and Frieda sitting idly at the table : " Forgive^ 
my intrusion ! But will you tell me when this place is 
to be finally put in order ? We have to sit here packed 
like herring, so that the teaching can't go on. And 
there are you lolling about in the big gymnasium, and 
you've even sent away the assistants to give yourselves 
more room. At least get on to your feet now and get 
a move on ! " Then to K. : " Now go and bring me 
my lunch from the Bridge Inn." All this was delivered 
in a furious shout, though the words were comparatively 
inoffensive. K. was quite prepared to obey, but to 
draw the teacher he said : " But I've been given notice.'* 



THE CASTLE 


189 

" Notice or no notice, bring me my lunch/' replied the 
teacher. " Notice or no notice, that's just what I want 
to be sure about," said K. " What nonsense is this ? " 
asked the teacher. "You know you didn't accept the 
notice." " And is that enough to make it invalid? " 
asked K. " Not for me," said the teacher, " you can 
take my word for that, but for the Superintendent, it 
seems, though I can't understand it. But take to your 
heels now, or else I'll fling ycMi out in earnest." K. was 
content the teacher then had spoken with the Super- 
intendent, or perhaps he hadn't spoken after all, but 
had merely thought over carefully the Superintendent's 
^probable intentions, and these had weighed in K.'s 
favour. Now K. was setting out hastily to get the lunch, 
but the teacher called him back from the very doorway, 
either because he wanted by this counter order to test 
K.’s willingness to serve, so that he might know how 
far he could go in future, or because a fresh fit of im- 
periousness had seized him, and it gave him pleasure 
to make K. run to and fro like a waiter. On his side K. 
knew that through too great compliance he would only 
become the teacher's slave and scapegoat, but within 
i* certain limits he decided for the present to give way to 
the fellow's caprices, for even if the teacher, as had been 
shown, had not the power to dismiss him, yet he could 
certainly make the post so difficult that it could not be 
borne. And the post was more important in K.'s eyes 
now than ever before. The conversation with Hans 
had raised new hopes in him, improbable, he admitted, 
completely groundless even, but all the same not to be 
put out of his mind ; they almost superseded Barnabas 
himself. If he gave himself up to them — and there was 
no choice — then he must husband all his strength, trouble 
about nothing else, food, shelter, the village authorities, 



THE CASTLE 


190 

no not even about Frieda — and in reality the whole 
thing turned only on Frieda, for everything else only 
gave him anxiety in relation to her. For this reason he 
must try to keep this post which gave Frieda a certain 
degree of security, and he must not complain if for this . 
end he were made to endure more at the teacher's hands 
than he would have had to endure in the ordinary course. 
All that sort of thing could be put up with, it belonged 
to the ordinary continual petty annoyances of life, it was 
nothing compared with what K. was striving for, and 
he had not come here simply to. lead an honoured and 
comfortable life. 

And so, as he had been ready to run over to the inn, ^ 
he showed himself now willing to obey the second order, 
and first set the room to rights so that the lady teacher 
and her children could come back to it. But it had to 
be done with all speed, for after that K. had to go for 
the lunch, and the teacher was already ravenous. K. 
assured him that it would all be done as he desired ; 
for a little the teacher looked on while K. hurried up, 
cleared away the sack of straw, put back the gymnastic 
apparatus in its place, and swept the room^out while 
Frieda washed and scrubbed the dais. Their diligence 
seemed to appease the teacher, he only drew their atten- 
tion to the fact that there was a pile of wood for the fire 
outside the door — he would not allow K. further access 
to the shed, of course — and then went back to his class 
with the threat that he would return soon and inspect. 

After a few minutes of silent work Frieda asked K. 
why he submitted so humbly to the teacher now. The 
question was asked in a sympathetic, anxious tone, but 
K., who was thinking how little Frieda had succeeded 
in keeping her origind promise to shield him from thf 
teacher's orders and insults, merely replied shortly that 



THE CASTLE 


I9I 

since he was the janitor he must fulfil the janitor's duties. 
Then there was silence again until K., reminded 
vividly by this short exchange of words that Frieda 
had been for a long time lost in anxious thought — and 
particularly through almost the whole conversation 
with Hans — asked her bluntly while he carried in the 
firewood what had been troubling her. Slowly turning 
her eyes upon him she replied that it was nothing 
definite, she had only been thinking of the landlady and 
the truth of much of what she said. Only when K. 
pressed her did she reply more consecutively after 
hesitating several times, but without looking up fiom 
her work — not that she was thinking of it, for it was 
making no progress, but simply so that she might not be 
compelled to look at K. And now she told him that 
during his talk with Hans she had listened quietly at 
first, that then she had been startled by certain words 
of his, then had begun to grasp the meaning of them 
more clearly, and that ever since she had not been able 
to cease reading into his words a confiimation of a warn- 
ing whi^h the landlady had once given her, and which 
she had always refused to believe. Exasperated by all 
this circumlocution, and more irritated than touched 
by Frieda's tearful, complaining voice — but annoyed 
above all because the landlady was coming into his 
affairs again, though only as a recollection, for in person 
she had had little success up till now — K. flung the wood 
he was carrying in his arms on to the floor, sat down on 
it, and in tones which were now serious demanded the 
whole truth. " More than once," began Frieda, " yes, 
since the beginning, the landlady has tried to make me 
doubt you, she didn't hold that you were lying, on the 
contrary she said that you were childishly open, but 
your character was so different from ours, she said, that. 



THE CASTLE 


192 

even when you spoke frankly, it was bound to be difficult 
for us to believe you ; and if we did not listen to good 
advice we would have to learn to believe you through 
bitter experience. Even she with her keen eye for people 
was almost taken in. But after her last talk with you 
in the Bridge Inn — I am only repeating her own words 
— she woke up to your tricks, she said, and after that you 
couldn't deceive her even if you did your best to hide 
your intentions. But you hid nothing, she repeated that 
again and again, and then she said afterwards : Try 
to listen to him carefully at the first favourable oppor- 
tunity, not superficially, but carefully, carefully. That 
was all that she had done and your own words had told 
her all this regarding myself : That you made up to me 
— she used those very words — only because I happened 
to be in your way, because I did not actually repel you, 
and because quite erroneously you considered a barmaid 
the destined prey of any guest who chose to stretch out 
his hand for her. Moreover, you wanted, as the land- 
lady learned at the Herrenhof, for some reason or 
other to spend that night at the Herrenhof, and that 
could in no circumstances be achieved except through 
me. Now all that was sufficient cause for you to become 
my lover for one night, but something more was needed 
to turn it into a more serious affair. And that something 
more was Klamm. The landlady doesn't claim to know 
what you want from Klamm, she merely maintains that 
before you knew me you strove as eagerly to reach 
Klamm as you have done since. The only difference 
was this, that before you knew me you were without any 
hope, but that now you imagine that in me you have a 
reliable means of reaching Klamm certainly and quickly 
and even with advantage to yourself. How startled 
I was — but that was only a superficial fear without 



THE CASTLE 


193 

deeper cause— when you said to-day that before you 
knew me you had gone about here in a blind circle. 
These might actually be the same words that the land- 
lady used, she, too, says that it's only since you have 
known me that you've become aware of your goal. 
That’s because you believe you have secured in me a 
sweetheart of Klamm's, and so possess a hostage which 
can only be ransomed at a great price. Your one 
endeavour is 1k) treat with Klamm about this hostage. 
As in your eyes I am nothing and the price everything, 
so you are ready for any concession so far as Tm con- 
cerned, but as for the price you’re adamant. So it’s 
a matter of indifference to you that I’ve lost my post 
at the Herrenhof and that I’ve had to leave the Bridge 
Inn as well, a matter of indifference that I have to endure 
the heavy work here in the school. You have no tender- 
ness to spare for me, you have hardly even time for me, 
you leave me to the assistants, the idea of being jealous 
never comes into your mind, my only value for you is 
tliat I was once Klamm’s sweetheart, in your ignorance 
you exert yourself to keep me from forgetting Klamm, 
so that when the decisive moment comes I should not 
make any resistance ; yet at the same time you carry 
on a feud with the landlady, the only one you think 
capable of separating me from you, and that’s why 
you brought your quarrel with her to a crisis, so as to 
have to leave the Bridge Inn with me ; but that, so far 
as Tm concerned, I belong to you whatever happens, 
you liaven’t the slightest doubt. You think of the inter- 
view with Klamm as a business deal, a matter of hard 
cash. You take every possibility into account ; pro- 
viding that you reach your end you’re ready to do any- 
thing ; should Klamm want me you are prepared to 
give me to him, should he want you to stick to me you'll . 
7 



THE CASTLE 


194 

Stick to me, should he want you to fling me out, you'll 
fling me out, but you're prepared to play a part too ; 
if it's advantageous to you, you'll give out that you love 
me, you'll try to combat his indiflFerence by emphasising ’ 
your own littleness, and then shame him by the fact that 
you’re his successor, or you'll be ready to carry him the 
protestations of love for him which you know I've made, 
and beg him to take me on again, of course on your 
terms ,* and if nothing else answers, then you'll simply 
go and beg from him in the name of K. and wife. But, 
the landlady said finally, when you see then that you 
have deceived yourself in everything, in your assumptions 
and in your hopes, in your ideas of Klamm and his 
relations with me, then my purgatory will begin, for 
then for the first time I'll be in reality the only posses- 
sion you'll have to fall back on, but at the same time it 
will be a possession that has proved to be worthless, and 
you'll treat it accordingly, seeing that you hgive no 
feeling for me but the feeling of ownership." 

With his lips tightly compressed K. had listened in- 
tently, the wood he was sitting on had rolled asunder 
though he had not noticed it, he had almost slid on to 
the floor, and now at last he got up, sat down on the 
dais, took Frieda’s hand, which she feebly tried to pull 
away, and said : " In what you've said I haven't 
always been able to distinguish the landlady's senti- 
ments from your own." " They're the landlady's 
sentiments purely," said Frieda, " I heard her out 
because I respected her, but it was the first time in my 
life that I completely and wholly refused to accept her 
opinion. All that she said seemed to me so pitiful, so 
far from any understanding of how things stood between 
us. There seemed actually to be more truth to me in 
the direct opposite of what she said. I thought of that 


H 



THE CASTLE 


*95 

sad morning after our first night together. You kneeling 
beside me with a look as if every^ing were lost. And 
how it really seemed then that in spile of all I could 
do, I was not helping you but hindering you. It was 
through me that the landlady had become your enemy, 
a powerful enemy, whom even now you still under- 
value ; it was for my sake that you had to take thought, 
that you had to fight for your post, that you were at a 
disadvantage* before the Superintendent, that you had 
to humble yourself before the teacher and were de- 
livered over to the assistants, but worst of all for my 
sake you had perhaps lost your chance with Klamm. 
That you still went on trying to reach Klamm was 
only a kind of feeble endeavour to propitiate him in 
some way. And I told myself that the landlady, who 
certainly knew far better than I, was only trying to 
shield me by her suggestions from bitter self-reproach. 
A well-meant but superfluous attempt. My love for 
you had helped me through everything, and would 
certainly help you on too, in the long run, if not here 
in the village, then somewhere else ; it had already 
given a proof of its power, it had rescued you from 
Barnabas's family." " That was your opinion, then, 
at the time," said K., "and has it changed since?" 
" I don't know," replied Frieda, glancing down at K.'s 
hand which still held hers, " perhaps nothing has 
changed ; when you're so close to me and question me 
so c^mly, then I think that nothing has changed. But 
in reality " — she drew her hand away from K., sat 
erect opposite him and wept without hiding her face; 
she held her tear-covered face up to him as if she were 
weeping not for herself and so had nothing to hide, 
but as if she were weeping over K.'s treachery and so 
the pain of seeing her tears was his due — " But h 



THE CASTLE 


196 

reality everything has changed since I’ve listened to 
you talking vv^ith that boy. How innocently you began 
asking about the family, about this and that 1 To me 
you looked just as you did that night when you came 
into the taproom, impetuous and frank, trying to catch 
my attention with such a childlike eagerness. You 
were just the same as then, and all I wished was that 
the landlady had been here and could have listened to 
you, and then we should h^ve seen whether she could 
still stick to her opinion. But then quite suddenly — I 
don’t know how it happened — noticed that you were 
talking to him with a hidden intention. You won his 
trust — and it wasn’t easy to win — by sympathetic words, 
simply so that you might with greater ease reach your 
end, which I began to recognise more and more clearly. 
Your end was that woman. In your apparently 
solicitous enquiries about her I could see quite nakedly 
your simple preoccupation with your own affairs. You 
were betraying that woman even before you had won 
her. In your words I recognised not only my past, 
but my future as well, it was as if the landlady were 
sitting beside me and explaining everything, and with 
all my strength I tried to push her away, but I saw 
clearly the hopelessness of my attempt, and yet it was 
not really myself who was going to be betrayed, it was 
not I who was really being betrayed, but that unknown 
woman. And then when I collected myself and asked 
Hans what he wanted to be and he said he wanted to 
be like you, and I saw that he had fallen under your 
influence so completely already, well what great differ- 
ence was there between him, being exploited here by you, 
the poor boy, and myself that time in the taproom ? ” 

“ Everything,” said K., who had regained his com- 
posure in listening. ” Everything that you say is in a 



THE CASTLE 


197 

certain sense justifiable, it is not untrue, it is only 
partisan. These are the landlady's ideas, my enemy's 
ideas, even if you imagine that they're your own ; and 
that comforts me. But they're instructive, one can learn 
a great deal from the landlady. She didn't express 
them to me personally, although she did not spare my 
feelings in other ways ; evidently she put this weapon 
in your hands in the hope that you would employ it 
at a particulatly bad or decisive point for me. If I am 
abusing you, then she is abusing you in the same way. 
But, Frieda, just consider ; even if everything were just 
as the landlady says, it would only be shameful on one 
supposition, that is, that you did not love me. Then, 
only then, would it really seem that I had won you 
through calculation and trickery, so as to profiteer by 
possessing you. In that case it might even have been 
part of my plan to appear before you arm-in-arm with 
Olga so as to evoke your pity, and the landlady has 
simply forgotten to mention that too in her list of my 
offences. But if it wasn't as bad as all that, if it wasn't 
a sly beast of prey that seized you that night, but you 
came to meet me, just as I went to meet you, and we 
found one another without a thought for ourselves, in 
that case, Frieda, tell me, how would things look ? If 
that were really so, in acting for myself I was acting 
for you too, there is no distinction here, and only an 
enemy could draw it. And that holds in everything, 
even in the case of Hans. Besides, in your condemna- 
tion of my talk with Hans your sensitiveness makes you 
exaggerate things morbidly, for if Hans's intentions and 
my own don't quite coincide, still that doesn't by any 
means amount to an actual antagonism between them, 
moreover our discrepancies were not lost on Hans, if 
you believe that you do grave injustice to the cautious 



THE CASTLE 


198 

little man, and even if they should have been all lost o 
him, still nobody will be any the worse for it, I hope." 

It's so difficult to see one's way, K.," said Fried 
with a sigh. '' I certainly had no doubts about yoi 
and if I have acquired something of the kind from tl 
landlady, I'll be only too glad to throw it off and be 
you for forgiveness on my knees, as I do, believe m 
all the time, even when I'm saying such horrible thing 
But the truth remains that you keep man^ things fro: 
me ; you come and go, I don't know where or fro: 
where. Just now when Hans knocked you cried 01 
Barnabas's name. I only wish you had once call( 
out my name as lovingly as for some incomprehensib 
reason you called that hateful name. If you have 1 
trust in me, how can I keep mistrust from rising ? 
delivers me completely to the landlady, whom y 
justify in appearance by your behaviour. Not in ever 
thing, I won't say that you justify her in everythir 
for was it not on my account alone that you sent t 
assistants packing ? Oh, if you but knew with wl 
passion I try to find a grain of comfort for myself in 
that you do and say, even when it gives me pair 
" Once and for all, Frieda," said K., "I conceal 1 
the slightest thing from you. See how the landla 
hates me, and how she does her best to get you av 
from me, and what despicable means she uses, and h 
you give in to her, Frieda, how you give in to h< 
Tell me, now, in what way do I hide anything fr 
you ? That I want to reach Klamm you know, t 
you can’t help me to do it and that accordingly I m 
do it by my own efforts you know too ; that I h 
not succeeded up till now you see for yourself. Ai 
CO humiliate myself doubly, perhaps, by telling you 
all the bootless attempts which have already humilis 



THE CASTLE 


199 

me sufficiently? Am I to plume myself on having 
waited and shivered in vain all an afternoon at the door 
of Klamm's sledge? Only too glad not to have to 
think of such things any more, I hurry back to you, 
and I am greeted again with all those reproaches from 
you. And Barnabas ? It's true Tm waiting for him. 
He's Klamm's messenger, it isn't I who made him 
that." " Barnabas again ! " cried Frieda. " I can't 
believe that h<?*s a good messenger." " Perhaps you're 
right," said K., " but he's the only messenger that's 
sent to me." " All the worse for you," said Frieda, 
“ all the more reason why you should beware of him." 
" Unfortunately he has given me no cause for that till 
now," said K. smiling. " He comes very seldom, and 
what messages he brings are of no importance ; only 
the fact that they come from Klamm gives them any 
value." " But listen to me," said Frieda, " for it is not 
even Klamm that's your goal now, perhaps that dis- 
turbs me most of all ; that you always longed for 
Klamm while you had me was bad enough, but that 
you seem to have stopped trying to reach Klamm now 
IS much worse, that's something which not even the 
landlady foresaw. According to the landlady your 
happiness, a questionable and yet very real happiness, 
would end on the day when you finally recognised that 
the hopes you founded on Klamm were in vain. But 
now you don't wait any longer even for that day, a 
young lad suddenly comes in and you begin to fight 
with him for his mother, as if you were fighting for your 
very life." " You've understood my talk with Hans 
quite correctly," said K., " it was really so. But is your 
whole former life so completely wiped from your mind 
(all except the landlady, of course, who won't allow 
herself to be wiped out), that you can't remember any 



200 


THE CASTLE 


longer how one must fight to get to the top, especially 
when one begins at the bottom ? How one must take 
advantage of everything that offers any hope whatever ? 
And this woman comes from the Castle, she told me 
herself on my first day here, when I happened to stray 
into Lasemann's. What's more natural than to ask 
her for advice or even for help ; if the landlady only 
knows the obstacles which keep one from reaching 
Klamm, then this woman •'probably knof/s the way to 
him, for she has come here by that way herself." " The 
way to Klamm ? " asked Frieda. " To Klamm, 
certainly, where else ? " said K. Then he jumped up : 
" But now it's high time I was going for the lunch." 
Frieda implored him to stay, urgently, with an eager- 
ness quite disproportionate to the occasion, as if onl)' 
his staying with her would confirm all the comfort- 
ing things he had told her. But K. was thinking of 
the teacher, he pointed towards the door, which any 
moment might fly open with a thunderous crash, and 
promised to return at once, she was not even to light 
the fire, he himself would see about it. Finally Frieda 
gave in in silence. As K. was stamping through the 
snow outside — the path should have been shovelled free 
long ago, strange how slowly the work was getting for- 
ward ! — he saw one of the assistants, now dead tired, 
still holding to the railings. Only one, where was the 
other ? Had K. broken the endurance of one of them, 
then, at least ? The remaining one was certainly still 
zealous enough, one could see that when, animated jpy 
the sight of K., he began more feverishly than ever to 
stretch out his arms and roll his eyes. " His obstinacy 
is really wonderful," K. told himself, but had to add, 
" he’ll freeze to the railings if he keeps it up." Out- 
wardly, however, K. had nothing for the assistant but 



THE CASTLE 


201 


a threatening gesture with his fist, which prevented 
any nearer approach ; indeed the assistant actually 
retreated for an appreciable distance. Just then Frieda 
opened one of the windows so as to air the room before 
putting on the fire, as she had promised K. Immedi- 
ately the assistant turned his attention from K., and 
crept as if irresistibly attracted to the window. Her 
face tom between pity for the assistant and a beseeching 
helpless glance which she 1:ast at K., Frieda put her 
hand out hesitatingly from the window, it was not clear 
whether it was a greeting or a command to go away, 
nor did the assistant let it deflect him from his resolve 
to come nearer. Then Frieda closed the outer window 
hastily, but remained standing behind it, her hand on the 
sash, with her head bent sidewards, her eyes wide, and a 
fixed smile on her face. Did she know that standing like 
that she was more likely to attract the assistant than repel 
him ? But K. did not look back again, he thought he 
had better hurry as fast as he could and get back quickly. 


XIV 

A t long last, late in the afternoon, when it was 
already dark, K. had cleared the garden path, 
piled the snow high on either side, beaten it down 
hard, and also accomplished his work for the day. 
He was standing by the garden gate in the middle of 
a wide solitude. He had driven off the remaining 
assistant hours before, and chased him a long way, but 
the fellow had managed to hide himself somewhere 
between the garden and the school house and could not 
be found, nor had he shown himself since. Frieda was 



202 


THE CASTLE 


indoors either starting to wash clothes or still washing 
Gisa*s cat ; it was a sign of great confidence on Gisa's 
part that this task had been entrusted to Frieda, an 
unpleasant and uncalled-for task, indeed, which K. 
would not have suffered her to attempt had it not been 
advisable in view of their various shortcomings to seize 
every opportunity of securing Gisa's goodwill. Gisa had 
looked on approvingly while K. brought down the 
little children's bath from the garret, heated water, and 
finally helped to put the cat carefully into the bath. Then 
she actually left the cat entirely in charge of Frieda, for 
Schwarzer, K.'s acquaintance of the first evening, 
had arrived, had greeted K. with a mixture of em- 
barrassment (arising out of the events of that evening) 
and of unmitigated contempt such as one accords 
to a debtor, and had vanished with Gisa into the 
other schoolroom. The two of them were still there. 
Schwarzer, K. had been told in the Bridge Inn, had 
been living in the village for some time, although he 
was a castellan's son, because of his love for Gisa, and 
through his influential connections had got himself 
appointed as a pupil-teacher, a position which he filled 
chiefly by attending all Gisa's classes, either sitting 
on a school bench among the children, or preferably 
at Gisa's feet on the teacher's dais. His presence was 
no longer a disturbance, the children had got quite used 
to it, all the more easily, perhaps, because Schwarzer 
neither liked nor understood children and rarely spoke 
to them except when he took over the gymnastic lessqp 
from Gisa, and was content merely to breathe the same 
air as Gisa and bask in her warmth and nearness. 

The only astonishing thing about it was that in the 
Bridge Inn at least Schwarzer was spoken of with a 
certain degree of respect, even if his actions were 



THE CASTLE 


203 

ridiculous rather than praiseworthy, and that Gisa was 
included in this respectful atmosphere. It was none 
the less unwarranted of Schwarzer to assume that his 
position as a pupil- teacher gave him a great superiority 
over K., for this superiority was non-existent. A school 
janitor was an important person to the rest of the staff— 
and should have been especially so to such an assistant 
as Schwarzer — a person not to be lightly despised, who 
should at lea^ be suitably •conciliated if professional 
considerations were not enough to prevent one from 
despising him. K. decided to keep this fact in mind, 
also that Schwarzer was still in his debt on account of 
their first evening, a debt which had not been lessened 
by the way in which events of succeeding days had 
seemed to justify Schwarzer 's reception of him. For it 
must not be forgotten that this reception had perhaps 
determined the later course of events. Because of 
Schwarzer the full attention of the authorities had been 
most unreasonably directed to K. at the very first hour of 
his arrival, while he was still a complete stranger in the 
village without a single acquaintance or an alternative 
shelter ; over-tired with walking as he was and quite 
helpless on his sack of straw, he had been at the mercy 
of any official action. One night later might have 
made all the difference, things might have gone quietly 
and been only half noticed. At any rate nobody 
would have known anything about him or have had 
any suspicions, there would have been no hesitation in 
accepting him at least for one day as a stray wanderer, 
his handiness and trustworthiness would have been 
recognised and spoken of in the neighbourhood, and 
probably he would soon have found accommodation 
somewhere as a servant. Of course the authorities 
would have found him out. But there would have been 



THE CASTLE 


204 

a big difference between having the Central Bureau, 
or whoever was on the telephone, disturbed on his 
account in the middle of the night by an insistent 
although ostensibly humble request for an immediate 
decision, made, too, by Schwarzer, who was probably 
not in the best odour up there, and a quiet visit by K. to 
the Superintendent on the next day during official hours 
to report himself in proper form as a wandering stranger 
who had already found qifarters in a respectable house, 
and who would probably be leaving the place in 
another day's time unless the unlikely were to happen 
and he found some work in the village, only for a day 
or two, of course, since he did not mean to stay longer. 
That, or something like that, was what would have 
happened had it not been for Schwarzer. The 
authorities would have pursued the matter further, 
but calmly, in the ordinary course of business, un- 
harassed by what they probably hated most, the im- 
patience of a waiting client. Well, all that was not K.'s 
fault, it was Schwarzer's fault, but Schwarzer was the 
son of a castellan, and had behaved with outward 
propriety, and so the matter could only be visited on 
K.'s head. And what was the trivial cause of it all ? 
Perhaps an ungracious mood of Gisa's that day, which 
made Schwarzer roam sleeplessly all night, and vent 
his annoyance on K. Of course on the other hand one 
could argue that Schwarzer's attitude was something 
K. had to be thankful for. It had been the sole pre- 
cipitant of a situation K. would never by himself h^ve 
achieved, nor have dared to achieve, and which the 
authorities themselves would hardly have allowed, 
namely, that from the very beginning without any 
dissimulation he found himself confronting the authori- 
ties face to face, in so far as that was at all possible. 



THE CASTLE 


205 

Still, that was a dubious gift, it spared K. indeed the 
necessity of lying and contriving, but it made him 
almost defenceless, handicapped him anyhow in the 
struggle, and might have driven him to despair had he 
not been able to remind himself that the difference in 
strength between the authorities and himself was so 
enormous that all the guile of which he was capable 
would hardly have served appreciably to reduce the 
difference in his favour. Yet that was only a reflection 
for his own consolation, Schwarzer was none the less 
in his debt, and having harmed K. then could be called 
upon now to help. K. would be in need of help in the 
quite trivial and tentative opening moves, for Barnabas 
seemed to have failed him again. 

On Frieda's account K. had refrained all day from 
going to Barnabas's house to make enquiries ; in 
order to avoid receiving Barnabas in Frieda's presence 
he had laboured out of doors, and when his work was 
done had continued to linger outside in expectation of 
Barnabas, but Barnabas had not come. The only 
thing he could do now was to visit the sisters, only for a 
minute or two, he would only stand at the door and 
ask, he would be back again soon. So he thrust the 
shovel into the snow and set off at a run. He arrived 
breathless at the house of Barnabas, and after a sharp 
knock flung the door open and asked, without looking 
to see who was inside : ** Hasn't Barnabas come back 
yet ? " Only then did he notice that Olga was not 
there, that the two old people, who were again sitting 
at the far end of the table in a state of vacancy, had not 
yet realised what was happening at the door and were 
only now slowly turning their faces towards it, and 
finally that Amalia had been lying beside the stove under 
1 blanket and in her alarm at K.'s sudden appearance 



THE CASTLE 


206 

had started up with her hand to her brow in an cfiFort 
to recover her composure. If Olga had been there she 
would have answered immediately, and K. could have 
gone away again, but as it was he had at least to take 
a step or two towards Amalia, give her his hand which 
she pressed in silence, and beg her to keep the startled 
old folks from attempting to meander through the 
room, which she did with a few words. K. learned that 
Olga was chopping wooci in the yard,*- that Amalia, 
exhausted — for what reason she did not say — had had 
to lie down a short time before, and that Barnabas had 
not yet indeed returned, but must return very soon, 
for he never stayed overnight in the Castle. K. thanked 
her for the information, which left him at liberty to go, 
but Amalia asked if he would not wait to see Olga. 
However, she added, he had already spoken to Olga 
during the day. He answered with surprise that he 
had not, and asked if Olga had something of particular 
importance to say to him. As if faintly irritated 
Amalia screwed up her mouth silently, gave him a 
nod, obviously in farewell, and lay down again. From 
her rccuinbeni position she iec her eyes resc on him 
as if she were astonished to see him still there. Her 
gaze was cold, clear, and steady as usual, it was never 
levelled exactly on the object she regarded but in some 
disturbing way always a little past it, hardly perceptibly, 
but yet unquestionably past it, not from weakness, 
apparently, nor from embarrassment, nor from duplicity, 
but from a persistent and dominating desire for isola- 
tion, which she herself perhaps only became conscious 
of in this way. K. thought he could remember being 
baffled on the very first evening by that look, probably 
even the whole hatefulness of the impression so quickly 
made on him by this family was traceable to that look. 



THE CASTLE 


207 

which in itself was not hateful but proud and upright 
in its reserve. " You are always so sad, Amalia,*' said 
K., ‘'is anything troubling you ? Can't you say what 
it is ? I have never seen a country girl at all like you. 
It never struck me before. Do you really belong to 
this village ? Were you born here ? " Amalia nodded, 
as if K. had only put the last of those questions, and 
then said: “So you'll wait for Olga?" “I don't 
know why you keep on asking me that," said K. “I 
can't stay any longer because my fiancee's waiting for 
me at home." Amalia propped herself on one elbow ; 
she had not heard of the engagement. K. gave Frieda's 
name. Amalia did not know it. She asked if Olga 
knew of their betrothal. K. fancied she did, for she 
had seen him with Frieda, and news like that was 
quick to fly round in a village. Amalia assured him, 
however, that Olga knew nothing about it, and that 
it would make her very unhappy, for she seemed to be 
in love with K. She had not directly said so, for she 
was very reserved, but love betrayed itself involuntarily. 
K. was convinced that Amalia was mistaken. Amalia 
smiled, and this smile of hers, although sad, lit up her 
gloomy face, made her silence eloquent, her strange- 
ness intimate, and unlocked a mystery jealously guarded 
hitherto, a mystery which could indeed be concealed 
again, but never so completely. Amalia said that she 
was certainly not mistaken, she would even go further 
and afiirm that K., too, had an inclination for Olga, 
and that his visits, which were ostensibly concerned 
with some message or other from Barnabas, were really 
intended for Olga. But now that Amalia knew all 
about it he need not be so strict with himself and could 
come oftener to see them. That was all she wanted 
to say. K. shook his head, and reminded her of hi 



THE CASTLE 


208 

betrothal. Amalia seemed to set little store by this 
betrothal, the immediate impression she received from 
K., who was after all unaccompanied, was in her opinion 
decisive, she only asked when K. had made the girl's 
acquaintance, for he had been but a few days in the 
village. K. told her about his night at the Herrenhof, 
whereupon Amalia merely said briefly that she had 
been very much against his being taken to the Herrenhof. 

She appealed for confirmation to Olga, v'ho had just 
come in with an armful of wood, fresh and glowing 
from the frosty air, strong and vivid, as if transformed 
by the change from her usual aimless standing about 
inside. She threw down the wood, greeted K. frankly, 
and asked at once after Frieda. K. exchanged a look 
with Amalia, who seemed, however, not at all discon- 
certed. A little relieved, K. spoke of Frieda more 
freely than he would otherwise have done, described 
the difficult circumstances in which she was managing 
to keep house in a kind of way in the school, and in 
the haste of his narrative — for he wanted to go home 
at once — so far forgot himself when bidding them 
good-bye as to invite the sisters to come and pay him 
a visit. He began to stammer in confusion, however, 
when Amalia, giving him no time to say another word, 
interposed with an acceptance of the invitation ; then 
Olga was compelled to associate herself with it. But 
K., still harassed by the feeling that he ought to go at 
once, and becoming uneasy under Amalia's gaze, did 
not hesitate any longer to confess that the invitation 
had been quite unpremeditated and had sprung merely 
from a personal impulse, but that unfortunately he 
could not confirm it since there was a great hostility, 
to him quite incomprehensible, between Frieda and 
their family. “ It's not hostility," said Amalia, getting 



THE CASTLE 


209 

up from her couch and flinging the blanket behind 
her, it's nothing so big as that, it's only a parrot 
repetition of what she hears everywhere. And now, go 
away, go to your young woman, I can see you're in a 
hurry. You needn't be afraid that we'll come, I only 
said it at first for fun, out of mischief. But you can 
come often enough to see us, there's nothing to hinder 
you, you can always plead Barnabas's messages as an 
excuse. I'll^make it easier, for you by telling you that 
Barnabas, even if he has a message from the Castle for 
you, can't go all the way up to the school to find you. 
He can't trail about so much, poor boy, he wears 
himself out in the service, you'll have to come yourself 
to get the news." K. had never before heard Amalia 
utter so many consecutive sentences, and they sounded 
differently from her usual comments, they had a kind 
of dignity which obviously impressed not only K. but 
Olga too, although she was accustomed to her sister. 
She stood a little to one side, her arms folded, in her 
usual stolid and somewhat stooping posture once more, 
with her eyes fixed on Amalia, who on the other hand 
looked only at K. " It's an error," said K., " a gross 
error to imagine that I'm not in earnest in looking for 
Barnabas, it's my most urgent wish, really my only 
wish, to get my business with the authorities properly 
settled. And Barnabas has to help me in that, most 
of my hopes are based on him. I grant he has dis- 
appointed me greatly once as it is, but that was more 
my fault than his ; in the bewilderment of my first 
hours in the village I believed that everything could be 
settled by a short walk in the evening, and when the 
impossible proved impossible I blamed him for it. 
That influenced me even in my opinion of your family 
and of you. But that is all past, I think I understand 



210 


THE CASTLE 


you better now, you are even '' K* tried to think 

of the exact word, but could not find it immediately, 
so contented himself with a makeshift — ** You seem to 
be the most good-natured people in the village so far 
as my experience goes. But now, Amalia, you're 
putting me off the track again by your depreciation — 
if not of your brother's service — ^then of the importance 
he has for me. Perhaps you aren't acquainted with 
his affairs, in which case it doesn't matter< but perhaps 
you are acquainted with them — and that's the impres- 
sion I incline to have — in which case it's a bad thing, 
for that would indicate that your brother is deceiving 
me." “ Calm yourself," said Amalia, " I'm not 
acquainted with them, nothing could induce me to 
become acquainted with them, nothing at all, not even 
my consideration for you, which would move me to do 
a great deal, for, as you say, we are good-natured people. 
But my brother's affairs are his own business, I know 
nothing about them except what I hear by chance now and 
then against my will. On the other hand Olga can tell you 
all about them, for she's in his confidence." And Amalia 
went away, first to her parents, with whom she 
whispered, then to the kitchen ; she went without taking 
leave of K., as if she knew that he would stay for a 
long time yet and that no good-bye was necessary. 


XV 

S EEING that with a somewhat astonished face K. 

remained standing where he was, Olga laughed 
at him and drew him towards the settle by the stove, she 
seemed to be really happy at the prospect of sitting there 



THE CASTLE 


211 


alone with him, but it was a contented happiness without 
a single hint of jealousy. And precisely this freedom 
of hers from jealousy and therefore from any kind of 
claim upon him did K. good, he was glad to look into 
her blue eyes which were not cajoling, nor hectoring, 
but shyly simple and frank. It was as if the warning 
of Frieda and the landlady had made him, not more 
susceptible to all those things, but more observant and 
more discerning. And h«# laughed with Olga when she 
expressed her wonder at his calling Amalia good-natured, 
of all things, for Amalia had many qualities, but good- 
nature was certainly not one of them. Whereupon K. 
explained that of course his praise had been meant for 
Olga, only Amalia was so masterful that she not only 
took to herself whatever was said in her presence, but 
induced other people of their own free will to inclndc 
her in everything. ** That's true," said Olga, becoming 
more serious, " truer than you think. Amalia's younger 
than me, and younger than Barnabas, but hers is the 
decisive voice in the family for good or for ill, of course 
she bears the burden of it more than anybody, the good 
as well as the bad." K. thought that an exaggeration, 
for Amalia had just said that she paid no attention, for 
instance, to her brother's affairs, while Olga knew all 
about them. " How can I make it clear ? " said Olga, 
" Amalia bothers neither about Barnabas nor about me, 
she really bothers about nobody but the old people 
whom she tends day and night ; now she has just asked 
^ them again if they want anything and has gone into 
the kitchen to cook them something, and for their sakes 
she has overcome her indisposition, for she's been ill 
since midday and been lying here on the settle. But 
although she doesn't bother about us we're as dependent 
on her as if she were the eldest, and if she were to advise 



212 


THE CASTLE 


us in our affairs we should certainly follow her advice, 
only she doesn't do it, she's different from us. You have 
experience of people, you come from a strange land, 
don't you think, too, that she's extraordinarily clever ? " 
‘'Extraordinarily unhappy is what she seems to me," 
j»aid K., " but how does it go with your respect for her 
chat Barnabas, for example, takes service as a messenger, 
in spite of Amalia's evident disapproval, and even her 
scorn ? " " If he knew wha^else to do he* would give 

up being a messenger at once, for it doesn't satisfy him." 
" Isn't he an expert shoemaker ? " asked K. " Of course 
he is," said Olga, " and in his spare time he does work 
for Brunswick, and if he liked he could have enough 
work to keep him going day and night and earn a lot 
of money." " Well then," said K., " that would be 
an alternative to his service as a messenger." " An 
alternative ? " asked Olga in astonishment. " Do you 
think he does it for the money ? " " Maybe he does," 

said K., " but didn't you say he was discontented ? " 
" He's discontented, and for various reasons," said Olga, 
" but it's Castle service, anyhow a kind of Castle service, 
at least one would suppose so." " What I " said K., 
" do you even doubt that ? " "Well," said Olga, " not 
really, Barnabas goes into the bureaux and is accepted 
by the attendants as one of themselves, he sees various 
olficials, too, from the distance, is entrusted with rela- 
tively important letters, even with verbally delivered 
messages, that's a good deal, after all, and we should 
be proud of what he has achieved for a young man of 
his years." K. nodded and no longer thought of going 
home. " He has a uniform of his own, too ? " he asked. 
"You mean the jacket ? " said Olga. " No, Amalia made 
that for him long before he became a messenger. But 
you're touching on a sore spot now. He ought long ago 



the castle 


21 } 

to have had, not a uniform, for there aren’t many in the 
Castle, but a suit provided by the department, and he 
has been promised one, but in things of that kind the 
Castle moves slowly, and the worst of it is that one never 
knows what this slowness means ; it can mean that the 
matter’s being considered, but it can also mean that 
it hasn’t yet been taken up, that Barnabas for instance 
is still on probation, and in the long run it can also 
mean that tfie whole thing^as been settled, that for some 
reason or other the promise has been cancelled, and that 
Barnabas will never get his suit. One can never find 
out exactly what is happening, or only a long time after- 
wards. We have a saying here, perhaps you’ve heard 
it : Official decisions are as shy as young girls.” ” That’s 
a good observation,” said K., he took it still more seri- 
ously than Olga, ” a good observation, and the decisions 
may have other characteristics in common with young 
girls.” ” Perhaps,” said Olga. ” But as far as the 
official suit’s concerned, that’s one of Barnabas’s great 
sorrows, and since we share all our troubles, it's one of 
mine too. We ask ourselves in vain why he doesn't get 
an official suit. But the whole aflFair is not just so simple 
as that. The officials, for instance, apparently have no 
official dress ; so far as we know here, and so far as 
Barnabas tells us, the officials go about in their ordinary 
clothes, very fine clothes, certainly. Well, you’ve seen 
Klamm. Now, Barnabas is certainly not an official, not 
even one in the lowest category, and he doesn’t overstep 
, his limitations so far as to want to be one. But according 
to Barnabas, the higher-grade servants, whom one cer- 
tainly never sees down here in the village, have no official 
dress ; that's a kind of comfort, one might suppose, but 
it’s a deceptive comfort, for is Barnabas a high-grade 
servant ? Not he ; however partial one might be 



THE CASTLE 


214 

towards him one couldn't maintain that, the fact that 
he comes to the village and even lives here is sufficient 
proof of the contrary, for the higher-grade servants arc 
even more inaccessible than the officials, perhaps rightly 
so, perhaps they are even of higher rank than many an 
official, there's some evidence of that, they work less, 
and Barnabas says it's a marvellous sight to see these 
tall and distinguished men slowly walking through the 
corridors, Barnabas always give them a wide berth. 
Well, he might be one of the lower-grade servants, then, 
but these always have an official suit, at least whenever 
they come down into the village, it's not exactly a uni- 
form, there are many different versions of it, but at any 
rate one can always tell Castle servants by their clothes, 
you've seen some of them in the Herrenhof. The most 
noticeable thing about the clothes is that they're mostly 
close-fitting, a peasant or a handworker couldn't do 
with them. Well, a suit like that hasn't been given to 
Barnabas and it's not merely the shame of it or the 
disgrace — one could put up with that — but the fact that 
in moments of depression — and we often have such 
moments, none too rarely, Barnabas and I — it makes 
us doubt everything. Is it really Castle service Barnabas 
is doing, we ask ourselves then ; granted, he goes into 
the bureaux, but are the bureaux part of the real Castle 7 
And even if there are bureaux actually in the Castle, are 
thc^ the bureaux that Barnabas is allowed to enter ? 

He's admitted into certain rooms, but they're only 
a part of the whole, for there are barriers behind which 
there are more rooms. Not that he's actually forbidden 
to pass the barriers, but he can't very well push past 
them once he has met his chiefs and been dismissed by 
them. Besides, everybody is watched there, at least so 
wc believe. And even if he did push on farther what 



THH CASTLE 


215 

good would it be to him, if he had no official duties to 
carry out and were a mere intruder ? And you mustn't 
imagine that these barriers are a definite dividing-line ; 
Barnabas is always impressing that on me. There are 
barriers even at the entrance to the rooms where he's 
admitted, so you see there are barriers he can pass, 
and they're just the same as the ones he's never yet 
passed, which looks as if one oughtn't to suppose that 
behind the • ultimate barders the bureaux are any 
different from those Barnabas has already seen. Only 
that's what we do suppose in moments of depression. 
And the doubt doesn't stop there, we can’t keep it 
within bounds. Barnabas sees officials, Barnabas is 
given messages. But who are those officials, and what 
are the messages ? Now, so he says, he's assigned to 
Klamm, who gives him his instructions in person. Well, 
that would be a great favour, even higher-grade 
servants don't get so far as that, it’s almost too much 
to believe, almost terrifying. Only think, directly 
assigned to Klamm, speaking with him face to face ! 
But is it really the case ? Well, suppose it is so, then 
why does Barnabas doubt that the official who is 
referred to as Klamm is really Klamm ? " “ Olga," 

said K., ** you surely must be joking ; how can there 
be any doubt about Klamm's appearance, everybody 
knows what he looks like, even I have seen him." " Of 
course not, K.," said Olga. " I'm not joking at all. 
I'm desperately serious. Yet I'm not telling you all 
this simply to telieve my own feelings and burden yours, 
but because Amalia charged me to tell you, since you 
were asking for Barnabas, and because I think too that 
it would be useful for you to know more about it. 
I'm doing it for Barnabas's sake as well, so that you 
won't pin too many hopes upon him, and suffer dis- 



THE CASTLE 


216 

appointment, and make him suflFer too because of your 
disappointment. He's very sensitive, for instance he 
didn't sleep all night because you were displeased with 
him yesterday evening. He took you to say that it 
was a bad lookout for you to have orJy a messenger 
like him. These words kept him oflF his sleep. I don't 
suppose that you noticed how upset he was, for Castle 
messengers must keep themselves well under control. 
But he hasn't an easy time, flot even with you, although 
from your point of view you don't ask too much of him, 
for you have your own prior conception of a messenger's 
powers and make your demands accordingly. But in 
the Castle they have a different conception of a 
messenger's duties, which couldn't be reconciled with 
yrours, even if Barnabas were to devote himself entirely 
to the task, which, unfortunately, he often seems in- 
clined to do. Still, one would have to submit to that 
and raise no objections if it weren't for the question 
whether Barnabas is really a messenger or not. Before 
you, of course, he can't express any doubt of it what- 
ever, to do that would be to undermine his very existence 
and to offend grievously against laws which he believes 
himself still plighted to, and even to me he doesn't 
speak freely, I have to cajole and kiss his doubts out of 
him, and even then he refuses to admit that his doubts 
are doubts. He has something of Amalia in him. And 
I'm sure that he doesn't tell me everything, although 
I'm his sole confidante. But we do often speak about 
Klamm, whom I've never seen ; you know Fried^ 
doesn't like me and has never let me look at him, 
still his appearance is well known in the village, some 
people have seen him, everybody has heard of him, and 
out of glimpses and rumours and through various dis- 
torting factors an image of Klamm has been construcced 



THE CASTLE 


217 

which is certainly true in fundamentals. But only in 
fundamentals. In detail it fluctuates, and yet perhaps 
not so much as Klamm's real appearance. For he's 
reported as having one appearance when he comes 
into the village and another on leaving it ; after having 
his beer he looks different from what he does before it, 
when he's awake he's different from when he's asleep, 
when he's alone he's different from when he's talking 
to people, and — what is ccJtnprehensible after all that — 
he's almost another person up in the Castle. And even 
within the village there are considerable differences in 
the accounts given of him, differences as to his height, 
his bearing, his size, and the cut of his beard ; fortun- 
ately there's one thing in which all the accounts agree, 
he always wears the same clothes, a black morning coat 
with long tails. Now of course all these differences 
aren't the result of magic, but can be easily explained ; 
they depend on the mood of the observer, on the degree 
of his excitement, on the countless graduations of hope 
or despair which are possible for him when he sees 
Klamm, and besides, he can usually see Klamm only 
for a second or two. I'm telling you all this just as 
Barnabas has often told it to me, and, on the whole, 
for anyone not personally interested in the matter, it 
would be a sufficient explanation. Not for us, how- 
ever ; it's a matter of life or death for Barnabas whether 
it's really Klamm he speaks to or not." " And for me 
no less," said K., and they moved nearer to each other 
pn the settle. 

All this depressing information of Olga's certainly 
affected K., but he regarded it as a great consolation 
to find other people who were at least externally much 
in the same situation as himself, with whom he could 
join forces and whom he could touch at many points. 



2i8 


THE CASTLE 


not merely at a few points as in Frieda's case. He was 
indeed gradually giving up all hope of achieving success 
through Barnabas, but the worse it went with Barnabas 
in the Castle the nearer he felt drawn to him down 
here ; never would K. have believed that in the village 
itself such a despairing struggle could go on as Barnabas 
and his sister were involved in. Of course it was as yet 
far from being adequately explained and might turn 
out to be quite the reverse^• one shouldn'^ let Olga's 
unquestionable innocence mislead one into taking 
Barnabas's uprightness for granted. " Barnabas is 
familiar with all those accounts of Klamm's appear- 
ance," went on Olga, " he has collected and compared 
a great many, perhaps too many, he even saw Klamm 
once through a carriage window in the village, or 
believed he saw him, and so was sufficiently prepared 
to recognise him again, and yet — how can you explain 
this ? — when he entered a bureau in the Castle and had 
one of several officials pointed out to him as Klamm 
he didn't recognise him, and for a long time afterwards 
couldn't accustom himself to the idea that it was Klamm. 
But if you ask Barnabas what was the difference between 
that Klamm and the usual description given of Klamm, 
he can’t tell you, or rather he tries to tell you and 
describes the official of the Castle, but his description 
coincides exactly with the descriptions we usually hear 
of Klamm. Well then, Barnabas, I say to him, why 
do you doubt it, why do you torment yourself ? Where- 
upon in obvious distress he begins to reckon up certain 
characteristics of the Castle official, but he seems to 
be thinking them out rather than describing them, and 
besides that they are so trivial — a particular way of 
nodding the head, for instance, or even an unbuttoned 
waistcoat — that one simply can't take them seriously. 



THE CASTLE 


219 

Much more important seems to me tlie way in which 
Klamm receives Barnabas. Barnabas has often de- 
scribed it to me, and even sketched the room. He's 
usually admitted into a large room, but the room isn't 
Klamm's bureau, nor even the bureau of any particular 
ofEcial. It's a room divided into two by a single 
reading-desk stretching all its length from wall to wall ; 
one side is so narrow that two people can hardly squeeze 
past each other, and that's* reserved for the officials, 
the other side is spacious, and that's where clients wait, 
spectators, servants, messengers. On the desk there 
are great books lying open, side by side, and officials 
stand by, most of them reading. They don't always 
stick to the same book, yet it isn't the books that they 
change but their places, and it always astounds Barnabas 
to see how they have to squeeze past each other when 
they change places, because there's so little room. In 
front of tlie desk and close to it there are small, low 
tables at which clerks sit ready to write from dictation, 
whenever the officials wish it. And the way that is 
done always amazes Barnabas. There's no express 
command given by the official, nor is the dictation 
given in a loud voice, one could hardly tell that it was 
being given at all, the official just seems to go on reading 
as before, only whispering as he reads, and the clerk 
hears the whisper. Often it's so low that the clerk 
can't hear it at all in his seat, and then he has to jump 
up, catch what's being dictated, sit down again quickly 
apd make a note of it, then jump up once more, and 
so on. What a strange business ! It's almost incom- 
prehensible. Of course Barnabas has time enough to 
observe it all, for he's often kept standing in the big 
room for hours and days at a time before Klamm 
happens to see him. And even if Klamm sees him and 



220 


THE CASTLE 


he springs to attention, that needn't mean anything, 
for Klamm may turn away from him again to the book 
and forget all about him. That often happens. But 
what can be the use of a messenger-service so casual 
as that ? It makes me quite doleful to hear Barnabas 
say in the early morning that he's going to the Castle. 
In all likelihood a quite useless journey, a lost day, a 
completely vain hope. What's the good of it all ? 
And here's cobbler's work piled up which never gets 
done and which Brunswick is always asking for." " Oh, 
well," said K., " Barnabas has just to hang on till he 
gets a commission. That's understandable, the place 
seems to be over-staffed, and everybody can't be given 
a job every day, you needn't complain about that, for 
it must affect everybody. But in the long run even a 
Barnabas gets commissions, he has brought two letters 
already to me." " It's possible, of course," answered 
Olga, " that we're wrong in complaining, especially a 
girl like me who knows things only from hearsay and 
can't understand it all so well as Barnabas, who certainly 
keeps many things to himself. But let me tell you 
how the letters are given out, your letters, for example. 
Barnabas doesn't get these letters directly from Klamm, 
but from a clerk. On no particular day, at no par- 
ticular hour — that's why the service, however easy it 
appears, is really very exhausting, for Barnabas must 
be always on the alert — a clerk suddenly remembers 
about him and gives him a sign, without any apparent 
instructions from Klamm, who merely goes on readii;)g 
in his book. True, sometimes Klamm is polishing his 
glasses when Barnabas comes up, but he often does 
that, anyhow — however, he may take a look at Barnabas 
then, supposing, that is, that he can see anything at all 
without his glasses, which Barnabas doubts ; for 



THE CASTLE 


221 


Klamm's eyes are almost shut, he generally seems to be 
sleeping and only polishing his glasses in a kind of 
dream. Meanwhile the clerk hunts among the piles 
of manuscripts and writings under his table and fishes 
out a letter for you, so it's not a letter newly written, 
indeed, by the look of the envelope, it's usually a very 
old letter, which has been lying there a long time. 
But if that is so, why do they keep Barnabas waiting 
like that ? And you too ? • And the letter too, of 
course, for it must be long out of date. That's how 
they get Barnabas the reputation of being a bad and 
slow messenger. It's all very well for the clerk, he just 
gives Barnabas the letter, saying : ' From Klamm for 
R. ' and so dismisses him. But Barnabas comes liome 
breathless, with his hardly won letter next to his bare 
skin, and then we sit here on the settle like this and he 
tells me about it and we go into all the particulars and 
weigh up what he has achieved and find ultimately 
that it's very little, and questionable at that until 
Barnabas lays the letter down with no longer any 
inclination to deliver it, yet doesn't feel inclined to go 
to sleep either, and so sits cobbling on his stool all 
night. That's how it is, K., and now you have all my 
secrets and you can't be surprised any longer at Amalia s 
indifference to them." " And what happens to the 
letter ? " asked K. " The letter ? " said Olga. Oh, 
some time later when I've plagued Barnab^ enough 
about it, it may be days or weeks later, he picks it up 
ag^in and goes to deliver it. In such practical matters 
he’s very dependent on me. For I can usually pull 
myself together after I've recovered from the first im- 
pression of what he has told me, but he can t, proba y 
because he knows more. So I always find something 
or other to say to him, such as ' What are you really 



THE CASTLE 


22 ^ 

aiming at, Barnabas ? What kind of career, wha 
ambition arc you dreaming of? Are you thinking a 
climbing so high that you'll have to leave us, to leav( 
me, completely behind you ? Is that what you'n 
aiming at ? How can I help believing so whe^ it*? 
the only possible explanation why you're so dreadfully 
discontented with all you've done ^ready ? Only take 
a look round and see whether any of our neighboun 
has got on so well as you. I admit their situation is 
different from ours and they have no grounds for 
ambition beyond their daily work, but even without 
making comparisons it's easy to see that you're all right. 
Hindrances there may be, doubts and disappointments, 
but that only means, what we all knew beforehand, 
that you get nothing without paying for it, that you 
have to fight for every trivial point ; all the more 
reason for being proud instead of downcast. And aren’t 
you fighting for us as well ? Doesn't that mean any- 
thing to you ? Doesn't that put new strength into you ? 
And the fact that I'm happy and almost conceited at 
having such a brother, doesn't that give you any con- 
fidence ? It isn't what you've achieved in the Castle 
that disappoints me, but the little that I'm able to 
achieve with you. You're allowed into the Castle, 
you're a regular visitor in the bureaux, you spend 
whole days in the same room as Klamm, you're an 
officially recognised messenger, with a claim on an 
official suit, you're entrusted with important com- 
missions, you have all that to your credit, and then ^ou" 
come down here and instead of embracing me and 
weeping for joy you seem to lose all heart as soon as 
you set eyes on me, and you doubt everything, nothing 
interests you but cobbling, and you leave the letter, 
the pledge of our future, lying in a corner.' That's 



THE CASTLE 


223 

how I speak to him, and after iVe repeated the same 
words day after day he picks up the letter at last with 
a sigh and goes off. Yet probably it's not the effect 
of what I say that drives him out, but a desire to go 
to the Castle again, which he dare not do without 
having delivered his message." " But you're absolutely 
right in everything you say," said K., " it's amazing 
how well you grasp it all. What an extraordinarily 
cleiil mind yeu have ! " "'No," said Olga, " it takes 

you in, and perhaps it takes him in too. For what 
has he really achieved ? He's allowed in to a bureau, 
but it doesn't seem to be even a bureau. He speaks to 
Klamm, but is it Klamm ? Isn't it rather someone 
nv'ho's a little like Klamm ? A secretary, perhaps, at 
the most, who resembles Klamm a little and takes 
pains to increase the resemblance and poses a little in 
Klamm's* sleepy and dreamy ^tyle. That side of his 
nature is the easiest to imitate, there are many who try 
it on, although they have sense enough not to attempt 
anything more. And a man like Klamm who is so 
much sought after and so rarely seen is apt to take 
different shapes in people's imagination. For instance, 
Klamm has a village secretary here called Momus. 
You know him, do you ? He keeps well in the back- 
ground too, but I've seen him several times. A stoutly- 
built young man, isn't he ? And so evidently not in 
the least like Klamm. And yet you'll find people in 
the village who swear that Momus is Klamm, he and 
no other. That's how people work their own con- 
fusion. Is there any reason why it should be different 
in the Castle ? Somebody pointed out that particular 
official to Barnabas as Klamm, and there is actually a 
resemblance that Barnabas has always questioned. 
And everything goes to support his doubt. Are we to 



THE CASTLE 


224 

suppose that Klamm has to squeeze his way among 
other officials in a common room with a pencil behind 
his ear? It's wildly improbable. Barnabas often says, 
somewhat like a child and yet in a child's mood of 
trustfulness : ' The official is really very like Klamm, 
and if he were sitting in his own office at his own 
desk with his name on the door I would have no 
more doubt at all.* That's childish, but reasonable. 
Of course it would be still fimore reasonable of Barnabas 
when he's up there to ask a few people about the truth 
of things, for judging from his account there are plenty 
of men standing round. And even if their information 
were no more reliable than that of the man who pointed 
out Klamm of his own accord, there would be surely 
some common ground, some ground for comparison, 
in the various things they said. That's not my idea, 
but Barnabas's, yet he doesn't dare to follow it out, 
he doesn't venture to speak to anybody for fear of 
offending in ignorance against some unknown rule and 
so losing his job ; you see how uncertain he feels ; 
and this miserable uncertainty of his throws a clearer 
light on his position there than all his descriptions. 
How ambiguous and threatening everything must appear 
to him when he won't even risk opening his mouth to 
put an innocent question ! When I reflect on that I 
blame myself for letting him go alone into those un- 
known rooms, which have such an effect on him that, 
though he's daring rather than cowardly, he apparently 
trembles with fright as he stands there." 

" Here I think you've touched on the essential point, 
said K. " That's it. After all you've told me, I believe 
I can see the matter clearly, Barnabas is too young for 
this task. Nothing he tells you is to be taken seriously 
at its face value. Since he's beside himself with fright 



THE CASTLE 


225 

up there, he's incapable of observing, and when you 
force him to give an account of what he has seen you 
get simply confused fabrications. That doesn’t surprise 
me. Fear of the authorities is born in you here, and is 
further suggested to you all your lives in the most various 
ways and from every side, and you yourselves help to 
strengthen it as much as possible. Still, I have no funda- 
mental objection to that ; if an authority is good why 
should it not# be feared ? Only one shouldn’t suddenly 
send an inexperienced youngster like Barnabas, who 
has never been farther than this village, into the Castle, 
and then expect a truthful account of everything from 
him, and interpret each single word of his as if it were a 
revelation, and base one’s own life’s happiness on the in- 
terpretation. Nothing could be more mistaken. I admit 
that I have let him mislead me in exactly the same way 
and have set hopes upon him and sufl'ered disappoint- 
ments through him, both based simply on his own words, 
that is to say, with almost no basis.” Olga was silent. 
” It won’t be easy for me,” went on K., ” to talk you 
out of your confidence in your brother, for I see how 
you love him and how much you expect from him. But 
I must do it, if only for the sake of that very love and 
expectation. For let me point out that there’s always 
something — I don’t know what it is — that hinders you 
from seeing clearly how much Barnabas has — I'll not 
say achieved — but has had bestowed on him. He’s 
permitted to go into the bureaux, or if you prefer, into 
an antechamber, well let it be an antechamber, it has 
doors that lead on farther, barriers which can be passed 
if one has the courage. To me, for instance, even this 
antechamber is utterly inaccessible, for the present at 
least. Who it is that Barnabas speaks to there I have 
no idea, perhaps the clerk is the lowest in the whole 
8 



THE CASTLE 


226 

Staff, but even if he is the lowest he can put one in touch 
with the next man above him, and if he can't do that 
he can at least give the other's name, and if he can't even 
do that he can refer to somebody who can give the name. 
This so-called Klamm may not have the smallest trait 
in common with the real one, the resemblance may not 
exist except in the eyes of Barnabas, half-blinded by fear, 
he may be the meanest of the officials, he may not even 
be an official at all, but all tfie same he has^ork of some 
kind to perform at the desk, he reads something or other 
in his great book, he whispers something to the clerk, 
he thinks something when his eye falls on Barnabas once 
in a while, and even if that isn't true and he and his acts 
have no significance whatever he has at least been set 
there by somebody for some purpose. All that simply 
means that something is there, something which Barnabas 
has the chance of using, something or other at the very 
least ; and that it is Barnabas's own fault if he can't get 
any further than doubt and anxiety and despair. And 
that's only on the most unfavourable interpretation of 
things, which is extremely improbable. For we have 
the actual letters which I certainly set no great store on, 
but more than on what Barnabas says. Let them be 
worthless old letters, fished at random from a pile of 
other such worthless old letters, at random and with 
no more discrimination than the love-birds show in the 
fairs when they pick one's fortune out of a pile ; let them 
be all that, still they have some bearing on my fate. 
They're evidently meant for me, although perhaps not - 
for my good, and, as the Superintendent and his wife 
have testified, they are written in Klamm's own hand, 
and, again on the Superintendent's evidence, they have 
a significance which is oiJy private and obscure, it is 
true, but still great." " Did the Superintendent say 



THE CASTLE 


227 

that? '' asked Olga. Yes, he did,*' replied K. “ I 
must tell Barnabas that," said Olga quickly ; " that 
will encourage him greatly." " But he doesn't need 
encouragement," said K. ; " to encourage him amounts 
to telling him that he's right, that he has only to go on 
as he is doing now, but that is just the way he will never 
achieve anything by. If a man has his eyes bound you 
can encourage him as much as you like to stare through 
the bandage, Jbut he'll never «ee anything. He'll be able 
to see only when the bandage is removed. It's help 
Barnabas needs, not encouragement. Only think, up 
there you have all the inextricable complications of a 
great authority — ^I imagined that I had an approximate 
conception of its nature before I came here, but how 
childish my ideas were ! — up there, then, you have the 
authorities and over against them Barnabas, nobody 
more, only Barnabas, pathetically alone, where it would 
be enough honour for him to spend his whole life cower- 
ing in a dark and forgotten corner of some bureau." 
" Don't imagine, K., that we underestimate the diffi- 
culties Barnabas has to face," said Olga, " we have 
reverence enough for the authorities, you said so your- 
self." " But it's a mistaken reverence," said K., " a 
reverence in the wrong place, the kind of reverence that 
dishonours its object. Do you call it reverence that 
leads Barnabas to abuse the privilege of admission to 
that room by spending his time there doing nothing, 
or makes him when he comes down again belittle and 
d^espise the men before whom he has just been trembling, 
or allows him because he's depressed or weary to put 
off delivering letters and fail in executing commissions 
entrusted to him ? That's far from being reverence. 
But I have a further reproach to make, Olga ; I must 
blame you too, I can't exempt you. Although you 



THE CASTLE 


228 

fancy you have some reverence for the authorities, you 
sent Barnabas into the Castle in all his youth and weak- 
ness and forlornness, or at least you didn't dissuade him 
from going," 

" This reproach that you make," said Olga, " is one 
I have made myself from the beginning. Not indeed 
that I sent Barnabas to the Castle, I didn't send him, 
he went himself, but I ought to have prevented him by 
all the means in my powers by force, by oraft, by per- 
suasion. I ought to have prevented him, but if I had 
to decide again this very day, and if I were to feel as 
keenly as I did then and still do the straits Barnabas is 
in, and our whole family, and if Barnabas, fully con- 
scious of the responsibility and danger ahead of him, 
were once more to free himself from me with a smile and 
set off, I wouldn't hold him back even to-day, in spite 
of all that has happened in between, and I believe that 
in my place you would do exactly the same. You don't 
know the plight we are in, that's why you're unfair to 
all of us, and especially to Barnabas. At that time we 
had more hope than now, but even then our hope wasn't 
great, but our plight was great, and is so still. Hasn't 
Frieda told you anything about us ? " " Mere hints," 

said K., " nothing definite, but the very mention of your 
name exasperates her." " And has the landlady told 
you nothing either ? " " No, nothing." " Nor any- 
body else ? " " Nobody." " Of course ; how could 

anybody tell you anything ? Everyone knows something 
about us, either the truth, so far as it is accessible, or at 
least some exaggerated rumour, mostly invention, and 
everybody thinks about us more than need be, but 
nobody will actually speak about it, people are shy of 
putting these things into words. And they're quite 
right in tliat. It's difficult to speak of it even before 



THE CASTLE 


229 

you, K., and when you Vc heard it all it's possible— 
isn't it ? — that you'll go away and not want to have 
anything more to do with us, however little it may seem 
to concern you. Then we should have lost you, and 
I confess that now you mean almost more to me than 
Barnabas's service in the Castle. But yet — and this 
argument has been distracting me all the evening — you 
must be told, otherwise you would have no insight into 
our situationf and, what woftid vex me most of all, you 
would go on being unfair to Barnabas. Complete accord 
would fail between us, and you could neither help us, 
nor accept our additional help. But there is still one 
more question : Do you really want to be told ? " ** Why 
do you ask ? " said K., if it's necessary, I would rather 
be told, but why do you ask me so particularly ? " 
“ Superstition," said Olga. " You'll become involved 
in our affairs, innocent as you are, almost as innocent 
as Barnabas." "Tell me quickly," said K., "I'm not 
afraid. You're certainly making it much worse than it 
is with such womanish fussing." 

Amalia's Secret 

" Judge for yourself," said Olga, " I warn you it 
sounds quite simple, one can't comprehend at first why 
it should be of any importance. There's a great official 
in the Castle called Sortini." " I've heard of him 
already," said K., " he had something to do with bring- 
ing me here." " I don't think so," said Olga, " Sortini 
'hardly ever comes into the open. Aren't you mistaking 
him for Sordini, spelt with a ' d ' ? " " You're quite 

right," said K., " Sordini it was." " Yes," said Olga, 
" Sordini is well known, one of the most industrious of 
the officials, he's often mentioned ; Sortini on the other 
hand is very retiring and quite unknown to most people. 



THE CASTLE 


230 

More than three years ago I saw him for the first and 
last time. It was on the third of July at a celebration 
given by the Fire Brigade, the Castle too had contributed 
to it and provided a new fire-engine. Sortini, who was 
supposed to have some hand in directing the affairs of 
the Fire Brigade, but perhaps he was only deputising 
for someone else — the officials mostly hide behind each 
other like that, and so it's difficult to discover what any 
official is actually responsible for — Sortinh took part in 
the ceremony of handing over the fire-engine. There 
were of course many other people from the Castle, 
officials and attendants, and true to his character Sortini 
kept well in the background. He's a small, frail, re- 
flective-looking gentleman, and one thing about him 
struck all the people who noticed him at all, the way 
his forehead was furrowed ; all the furrows — and there 
were plenty of them although he's certainly not more 
than forty — were spread fan wise over his forehead, 
running towards the root of his nose, I've never seen 
anything like it. Well then, we had that celebration. 
Amalia and I had been excited about it for weeks before- 
hand, our Sunday clothes had been done up for the 
occasion and were partly new, Amalia's dress was speci- 
ally fine, a white blouse foaming high in front with one 
row of lace after the other, our mother had taken every 
bit of her lace for it. I was jealous, and cried half the 
night before the celebration. Only when the Bridge 

Inn landlady came to see us in the morning " “ The 

Bridge Inn landlady?" asked K. "Yes," said Olg^,^ 
" she was a great friend of ours, well, she came and had 
to admit that Amalia was the finer, so to console me 
she lent me her own necklace of Bohemian garnets. 
When we were ready to go and Amalia was standing 
beside me and we were all admiring her, my father 



THE CASTLE 


231 

said : * To-day, mark my words, Amalia will find a 
husband ' ; then, I don't know why, I took my necklace, 
my great pride, and hung it round Amalia's neck, and 
wasn't jealous any longer. I bowed before her triumph 
and I felt that everyone must bow before her, perhaps 
what amazed us so much was the difference in her 
appearance, for she wasn't really beautiful, but her 
sombre glance, and it has kept the same quality since 
that day, was high over ourlieads and involuntarily one 
had almost literally to bow before her. Everybody 
remarked on it, even Lasemann and his wife who came 
to fetch us." " Lasemann ? " asked K. " Yes, Lase- 
mann," said Olga, " we were in high esteem, and the 
celebration couldn't well have begun without us, for 
my father was the third in command of the Fire Brigade." 
" Was your father still so active ? " asked K. " Father ? " 
returned Olga, as if she did not quite comprehend, 
" three years ago he was still relatively a young man, 
for instance, when a fire broke out at the Herrenhof 
he carried an official, Galater, who is a heavy man, out 
of the house on his back at a run. I was there myself, 
there was no real danger, it was only some dry wood 
near a stove which had begun to smoke, but Galater 
was terrified and cried for help out of the window, and 
the Fire Brigade turned out, and father had to carry 
him out although the fire was already extinguished. Of 
course Galater finds it difficult to move and has to be 
careful in circumstances like that. I'm telling you this 
Wy on father's account ; not much more than three 
years have passed since then, and look at him now." 
Only then did K. become aware that Amalia was again 
in the room, but she was a long way off at the table where 
her parents sat, she was feeding her mother who could 
not move her rheumaticky arms, and admonishing her 



THE CASTLE 


232 

father meanwhile to wait in patience for a little, it would 
soon be his turn. But her admonition was in vain, for 
her father, greedily desiring his soup, overcame his 
weakness and tried to drink it first out of the spoon and 
then out of the bowl, and grumbled angrily when neither 
attempt succeeded ; the spoon was empty long before 
he got it to his lips, and his mouth never reached the 
soup, for his drooping moustache dipped into it and 
scattered it every wliere except into his mbuth. And 
have three years done that to him ? '' asked K., yet he 
could not summon up any sympathy for the old people, 
and for that whole corner with the table in it he felt only 
repulsion. Three years,*' replied Olga slowly, ** or, 
more precisely, a few hours at that celebration. The 
celebration was held on a meadow by the village, at the 
brook ; there was already a large crowd there when 
we arrived, many people had come in from neighbouring 
villages, and the noise was bewildering. Of course my 
father took us first to look at the fire-engine, he laughed 
with delight when he saw it, the new fire-engine made 
him happy, he began to examine it and explain it to 
us, he v/ouldn't hear of any opposition or holding back, 
but made every one of us stoop and almost crawl under 
the engine if there was something there he had to show 
us, and he smacked Barnabas for refusing. Only Amalia 
paid no attention to the engine, she stood upright beside 
it in her fine clothes and nobody dared to say a word 
to her, I ran up to her sometimes and took her arm, but 
she said nothing. Even to-day I cannot explain how 
we came to stand for so long in front of the fire-engine 
without noticing Sortini until the very moment my 
father turned away, for he had obviously been leaning on 
a wheel behind the fire-engine all the time. Of course 
there was a terrific racket all round us, not only the usual 



THE CASTLE 


233 

kind of noise, for the Castle had presented the Fire 
Brigade with some trumpets as well as the engine, extra- 
ordinary instruments on which with the smallest eflFort 
— a child could do it — one could produce the wildest 
blasts ; to hear them was enough to make one think 
the Turks were there, and one could not get accustomed 
to them, every fresh blast made one jump. And because 
the trumpets were new everybody wanted to try them, 
and because k was a celebraflion, everybody was allowed 
to try. Right at our ears, perhaps Amalia had attracted 
them, were some of these trumpet blowers. It was diffi- 
ciJt to keep one's wits about one, and obeying father 
and attending to the fire-engine was the utmost we were 
capable of, and so it was that Sortini escaped our notice 
for such a long time, and besides we had no idea who 
he was. ‘ There is Sortini,' Lasemann whispered at last 
to my father — was beside him — and father, greatly 
excited, made a deep bow, and signed to us to do the 
same. Without having met him till now father had 
always honoured Sortini as an authority in Fire Brigade 
matters, and had often spoken of him at home, so it was 
a very astonishing and important matter for us actually 
to see Sortini with our own eyes. Sortini, however, 
paid no attention to us, and in that he wasn't peculiar, 
for most of the officials hold themselves aloof in public, 
besides he was tired, only his official duty kept him 
there. It's not the worst officials who find duties like 
that particularly trying, and anyhow there were other 
dfficials and attendants mingling with the people. But 
he stayed by the fire-engine and discouraged by his 
silence all those who tried to approach him with some 
request or piece of flattery. So it happened that he 
didn't notice us until long after we had noticed him. 
Only as we bowed respectfully and father was making 



apologies for us did he look our way and scan us one 
after another wearily, as if sighing to find that there 
was still another and another to look at, until he let his 
eyes rest on Amalia, to whom he had to look up, for she 
was much taller than he* At the sight of her he started 
and leapt over the shaft to get nearer to her, we mis- 
understood him at first and began to approach him, 
father leading the way, but he held us off with uplifted 
hand and then waved us way. That w/as all. We 
teased Amalia a lot about having really found a husband, 
and in our ignorance we were very merry the whole of 
that afternoon. But Amalia was more silent than usual. 

‘ She's fallen head over ears in love with Sort ini,' said 
Brunswick, who is always rather vulgar and has no 
comprehension of natures like Amalia’s. Yet this time 
we were inclined to think that he was right, we were 
quite mad that day, and all of us, even Amalia, were 
as if stupefied by the sweet Castle wine when we came 
home about midnight." " And Sortini ? " asked K. 
"Yes, Sortini,” said Olga, " I saw him several times 
during the afternoon as I passed by, he was sitting on 
the engine shaft with his arms folded, and he stayed 
there till the Castle carriage came to fetch him. He 
didn't even go over to watch the fire-drill at which 
father, in the very hope that Sortini was watching, dis- 
tinguished himself beyond all the other men of his age." 

" And did you hear nothing more from him ? " asked 
K. " You seem to have a great regard for Sortini." 

" Oh, yes, regard," said Olga, " oh, yes, and hear fron^ 
him we certainly did. Next morning we were roused 
from our heavy sleep by a scream from Amalia ; the 
others rolled back into their beds again, but I was com- 
pletely awake and ran to her. She was standing by 
the window holding a letter in her hand which had just 



THE CASTLE 


^35 

been given in through the window by a man who was 
still waiting for an answer. The letter was short, and 
Amalia had already read it, and held it in her drooping 
hand ; how I always loved her when she was tired like 
that ! I knelt down beside her and read the letter. 
Hardly had I finished it when Amalia after a brief glance 
at me took it back, but she couldn't bring herself to read 
it again, and tearing it in pieces she threw the fragments 
in die face of the man outiade and shut the window. 
That was the morning which decided our fate. I say 
' decided but every minute of the previous afternoon 
was just as decisive." " And what was in the letter ? " 
asked K. " Yes, I haven't told you that yet," said Olga, 
the letter was from Sortini addressed to the girl with 
the garnet necklace. I can't repeat the contents. It was 
a summons to come to him at the Herrenhof, and to 
come at once, for in half an hour he was due to leave. 
The letter was couched in the vilest language, such as 
I have never heard, and I could only half guess its mean- 
ing from the context. Anyone who didn't know Amalia 
and saw this letter must have considered a girl who 
could be written to like that as dishonoured, even if 
she had never had a finger laid on her. And it wasn't 
a love letter, there wasn't a tender word in it, on the 
contrary Sortini was obviously enraged because the 
sight of Amalia had disturbed him and distracted him 
in his work. Later on we pieced it all together for our- 
selves ; evidently Sortini had intended to go straight 
tO^the Castle that evening, but on Amalia's account had 
stayed in the village instead, and in the morning, being 
very angry because even overnight he hadn't succeeded 
in forgetting her, had written the letter. One couldn't 
but be furious on first reading a letter like that, even the 
most cold-blooded person might have been, but though 



THE CASTLE 


236 

with anybody else fear at its threatening tone would 
soon have got the upper hand, Amalia only felt anger, 
fear she doesn't know, neither for herself nor for others. 
And while I crept into bed again repeating to myself 
the closing sentence, which broke off in the middle, 

' See tliat you come at once, or else ! ' Amalia 

remained on the window-seat looking out, as if she were 
expecting further messengers and were prepared to treat 
them all as she had done *the first." " So that's what 
the officials are like," said K. reluctantly, " that's the 
kind of type one finds among them. What did your 
father do ? I hope he protested energetically in the 
proper quarter, if he didn't prefer a shorter and quicker 
way of doing it at the Herrenhof. The worst thing about 
the story isn't the insult to Amalia, that could easily 
have been made good, I don't know why you lay such 
exaggerated stress upon it ; why should such a letter 
from Sortini shame Amalia for ever ? — which is what 
one would gather from your story, but that's a sheer 
impossibility, it would have been easy to make up for 
it to Amalia, and in a few days the whole thing might 
have blown over, it was himself that Sortini shamed, 
and not Amalia. It's Sortini that horrifies me, the 
possibility of such an abuse of power. The very thing 
that failed this one time because it came naked and 
undisguised and found an effective opponent in Amalia, 
might very well succeed completely on a thousand other 
occasions in circumstances just a little less favourable, 
and might defy detection even by its victim." " HusI^**" 
said Olga, " Amalia's looking this way." Amalia had 
finished giving food to her parents and was now busy 
taking off her mother's clothes. She had just undone 
the skirt, hung her mother's arms round her neck, lifted 
her a little, while she drew the skirt off, and now gently 



THE CASTLE 


^37 

set her down again. Her father, still affronted because 
his wife was being attended to first, which obviously 
only happened because she was even more helpless than 
he, was attempting to undress himself; perhaps, too, 
it was a reproach to his daughter for her imagined slow- 
ness ; yet although he began with the easiest and least 
necessary thing, the removal of the enormous slippers 
in which his feet were loosely stuck, he could not get 
them pulled qflF at all, and wheezing hoarsely was forced 
to give up trying, and leaned back stiffly in his chair 
again. ** But you don't realise the really decisive thing," 
said Olga, " you may be right in all you say, but the 
decisive thing was Amalia's not going to the Herrenhof ; 
her treatment of the messenger might have been excused, 
it could have been passed over ; but it was because she 
didn't go that the curse was laid upon our family, and 
that turned her treatment of the messenger into an 
unpardonable offence, yes, it was even brought forward 
openly later as the chief offence." " What ! " cried 
K. at once, lowering his voice again, as Olga raised her 
hands imploringly, " do you, her sister, actually say that 
Amalia should have run to the Herrenhof after Sortini ? " 
" No," said Olga, " Heaven preserve me from such a 
suspicion, how can you believe that ? I don't know 
anybody who's so right as Amalia in everything she 
does. If she had gone to the Herrenhof I should of 
course have upheld her just the same ; but her not 
going was heroic. As for me, I confess it frankly, had 
h received a letter like that I should have gone. I 
shouldn't have been able to endure the fear of what 
might happen, only Amalia could have done that. For 
there were many ways of getting round it ; another girl, 
for instance, might have decked herself up and wasted 
some time in doing it and then gone to the Herrenhof 



THE CASTLE 


238 

only to find that Sortini had left, perhaps to find that 
he had left immediately after sending the messenger, 
which is very probable, for the moods of the gentlemen ^ 
are fleeting. But Amalia neither did that nor anything 
else, she was too deeply insulted, and answered without 
reserve. If she had only made some pretence of com- 
pliance, if she had but crossed the threshold of the 
Herrenhof at the right moment, our punishment could 
have been turned aside, we have very clever advocates 
here who can make a great deal out of a mere nothing, 
but in this case they hadn't even the mere nothing to 
go on, there was, on the contrary, the disrespect to 
Sortini's letter and the insult to his messenger." " But 
what is all this about punishment and advocates ? " 
said K. " Surely Amalia couldn't be accused or 
punished because of Sortini 's criminal proceedings ? " 
"Yes," said Olga, " she could, not in a regular suit at 
law, of course ; and she wasn't punished directly, but 
she was punished all right in other ways, she and the 
whole family, and how heavy the punishment has been 
you are surely beginning to understand. In your 
opinion it's unjust and monstrous, but you're the only 
one in the village of that opinion, it's an opinion favour- 
able to us, and ought to comfort us, and would do that 
if it weren't so obviously based on error. I can easily 
prove that, and you must forgive me if I mention Frieda 
by the way, but between Frieda and Klamm, leaving 
aside the final outcome of the two affairs, the first pre- 
liminaries were much the same as between Amalia anf^ 
Sortini, and yet, although that might have shocked you 
at die beginning, you accept it now as quite natural. 
And that's not merely because you're accustomed to 
it, custom alone couldn't blunt one's plain judgment, 
it's simply that you've freed yourself from prejudice." 



THE CASTLE 


239 

No, Olga/' said K., “ I don't see why you drag in 
Frieda, her case wasn't the same, don't confuse two 
such different things, and now go on with your story." 
** Please don't be offended," said Olga, " if I persist in 
the comparison, it's a lingering trace of prejudice on 
your part, even in regard to Frieda, that makes you 
feel you must defend her from a comparison. She's not 
to be defended, but only to be praised. In comparing 
the two cas^s I don't say #they're exactly alike, they 
stand in the same relation as black to white, and the 
white is Frieda. The worst thing one can do to Frieda 
is to laugh at her, as I did in the bar very rudely — and 
I was sorry for it later — but even if one laughs it's out 
of envy or malice, at any rate one can laugh. On the 
other hand, unless one is related to her by blood, one 
can only despise Amalia. Therefore the two cases are 
quite different, as you say, but yet they are alike." 
" They're not at all alike," said K., and he shook his 
head stubbornly, " leave Frieda out of it, Frieda got no 
such fine letter as that of Sortini's, and Frieda was really 
in love with Klamm, and, if you doubt that, you need 
only ask her, she loves him still." " But is that really 
a difference ? " asked Olga. " Do you imagine Klamm 
couldn’t have written to Frieda in the same tone ? 
That’s what the gentlemen are like when they rise from 
their desks, they feel out of place in the ordinary world 
and in their distraction they say the most beastly things, 
not all of them, but many of them. The letter to Amalia 
may have been the thought of a moment, thrown on 
tRe paper in complete disregard for the meaning to be 
taken out of it. What do we know of the thoughts of 
these gentlemen ? Haven't you heard of, or heard 
yourself, the tone in which Klamm spoke to Frieda ? 
Klamm's notorious for his rudeness, he can apparently 



THE CASTLE 


240 

sit dumb for hours and then suddenly bring out some- 
thing so brutal that it makes one shiver. Nothing of 
that kind is known of Sortini, but then very little is 
known of him. All that's really known about him is 
that his name is like Sordini's. If it weren't for that 
resemblance between the two names probably he 
wouldn't be known at all. Even as the Fire Brigade 
authority apparently he's confused with Sordini, who 
is the real authority, and who exploits th^ resemblance 
in name to push things on to Sortini's shoulders, especi- 
ally any duties falling on him as a deputy, so that he can 
be left undisturbed to his work. Now when a man so 
unused to society as Sortini suddenly felt himself in 
love with a village girl, he'll naturally take it quite 
differently from, say, the joiner's apprentice next door. 
And one must remember, too, that between an official 
and a village cobbler's daughter there's a great gulf 
fixed which has to be somehow bridged over, and Sortini 
tried to do it in that way, where someone else might 
have acted diflerently. Of course we're all supposed 
to belong to the Castle, and there's supposed to be no 
gulf between us, and nothing to be bridged over, and 
that may be true enough on ordinary occasions, but 
we’ve had grim evidence that it's not true when anything 
really important crops up. At any rate, all that should 
make Sortini's methods more comprehensible to you, 
and less monstrous ; compared with Klamm's they're 
comparatively reasonable, and even for those intimately 
affected by them much more endurable. When Klamn^ 
writes a loving letter it's much more exasperating than 
the most brutal letter of Sortini's. Don't mistake me. 
I'm not venturing to criticise Klamm, I'm only com- 
paring the two, because you're shutting your eyes to 
the comparison. Klamm's a kind of tyrant over women, 



THE CASTLE 


241 

he orders first one and then another to come to him, 
puts up with none of them for long, and orders them to 
go just as he ordered them to come. Oh, Klamm 
wouIdn^t even give himself the trouble of writing a letter 
first. And in comparison with that is it so monstrous 
that Sortini, who's so retiring, and whose relations with 
women are at least unknown, should condescend for once 
to write in his beautiful official hand a letter, however 
abominable?^ And if ther/'s no distinction here in 
Klamm's favour, but the reverse, how can Frieda's love 
for him establish one ? The relation existing between 
the women and the officials, believe me, is very difficult, 
or rather very easy to determine. Love always enters 
into it. There's no such thing as an official's unhappy 
love affair. So in that respect it's no praise to say or a 
girl — I'm referring to many others besides Frieda — that 
she gave herself to an official only out of love. She loved 
him and gave herself to him, that was all, there's nothing 
praiseworthy in that. But you'll object that Amalia 
didn't love Sortini. Well, perhaps she didn't love him, 
but then after all perhaps she did love him, who can 
decide ? Not even she herself. How can she fancy she 
didn't love him, when she rejected him so violently, 
as no official has ever been rejected ? Barnabas says 
that even yet she sometimes trembles with the violence 
of the effort of closing the window three years ago. 
That is true, and therefore one can't ask her anything ; 
she has finished with Sortini, and that's all she knows ; 
livhether she loves him or not she does not know. But 
^e do know that women can't help loving the officials 
once they give them any encouragement, yes, they even 
love them beforehand, let them deny it as much as they 
like, and Sortini not only gave Amalia encouragement, 
but leapt over the shaft when he saw her ; although 



THE CASTLE 


242 

his legs were stiff from sitting at desks he leapt right over 
the shaft. But Amalia's an exception, you will say. Yes, 
that she is, that she has proved in refusing to go to 
Sortini, that's exception enough, but if in addition she 
weren't in love with Sortini, she would be too excep- 
tional for plain human understanding. On that after- 
noon, I grant you, we were smitten with blindness, but 
the fact that in spite of our mental confusion we thought 
we noticed signs of Amalia's being in love, showed at 
least some remnants of sense. But when all that's taken 
into account, what difference is left between Frieda 
and Amalia 7 One thing only, that Frieda did what 
Amalia refused to do." " Maybe," said K., " but for 
me the main difference is that I'm engaged to Frieda, 
and only interested in Amalia because she's a sister of 
Barnabas’s, the Castle messenger, and because her 
destiny may be bound up with his duties. If she had 
suffered such a crying injustice at the hands of an official 
as your tale seemed to infer at the beginning, I should 
have taken the matter up seriously, but more from a 
sense of public duty than from any personal sympathy 
with Amalia. But what you say has changed the aspect 
of the situation for me in a way I don't quite understand, 
but am prepared to accept, since it's you who tell me, 
and therefore I want to drop the whole affair ; I'm no 
member of the Fire Brigade, Sortini means nothing to 
me. But Frieda means something to me, I have trusted 
her completely and want to go on trusting her, and it 
surprises me that you go out of your way, while discussing 
Amalia, to attack Frieda and try to shake my confidence 
in her. I'm not assuming that you're doing it with 
deliberate intent, far less with malicious intent, for in 
that case I should have left long ago. You're not doing 
it deliberately, you're betrayed into it by circumstances, 



THE CASTLE 


24S 

impelled by your love for Amalia you want to exalt her 
above all other women, and since you can't find enough 
virtue in Amalia herself you help yourself out by be- 
littling the others. Amalia's act was remarkable enough, 
but the more you say about it the less clearly can it be 
decided whether it was noble or petty, clever or foolish, 
heroic or cowardly ; Amalia keeps her motives locked 
in her own bosom and no one will ever get at them. 
Frieda, on »the other hand, has done nothing at all 
remarkable, she has only followed her own heart, for 
anyone who looks at her actions with goodwill that is 
clear, it can be substantiated, it leaves no room for 
slander. However, I don't want either to belittle Amalia 
or to defend Frieda, all I want is to let you see what my 
relation is to Frieda, and that every attack on Frieda 
is an attack on myself. I came here of my own accord, 
and of my own accord I have settled here, but all that 
has happened to me since I came, and, above all, any 
prospects I may have — dark as they are, they still exist 
— I owe entirely to Frieda, and you can't argue that 
away. True, I was engaged to come here as a Land 
Surveyor, yet that was only a pretext, they were playing 
with me, I was driven out of everybody’s house, they’re 
playing with me still to-day ; but how much more 
complicated the game is now that I have, so to speak, 
a larger circumference — which means something, it 
may not be much — ^yet I have already a home, a posi- 
tion and real work to do, I have a promised wife who 
•^akes her share of my professional duties when I have 
other business. I’m going to marry her and become a 
member of the community, and besides my official 
connection I have also a personal connection with 
Klamm, although as yet I haven't been able to make 
use of it. That’s surely quite a lot ? And when 1 come 



THE CASTLE 


244 

to you, why do you make me welcome ? Why do you 
confide the history of your family to me 1 Why do you 
hope that I might possibly help you? Certainly not 
because Vm the Land Surveyor whom Lasemann and 
Brunswick, for instance, turned out of their house a week 
ago, but because I'm a man with some power at my 
back. But that I owe to Frieda, to Frieda who is so 
modest that if you were to ask her about it, she wouldn't 
know it existed. And so, considering all tljis, it seems 
that Frieda in her innocence has achieved more than 
Amalia in all her pride, for may I say that I have the 
impression that you're seeking help for Amalia. And 
from whom ? In the last resort from no one else but 
Frieda." " Did I really speak so abominably of Frieda ? " 
asked Olga, " I certainly didn't mean to, and I don't 
think I did, still, it's possible ; we're in a bad way, our 
whole world is in ruins, and once we begin to complain 
we're carried farther than we realise. You're quite 
right, there's a big difference now between us and 
Frieda, and it's a good thing to emphasise it once in a 
while. Three years ago we were respectable girls and 
Frieda an outcast, a servant in the Bridge Inn, we used 
to walk past her without looking at her, I admit we 
were too arrogant, but that's how we were brought up. 
But that evening in the Herrenhof probably enlightened 
you about our respective positions to-day. Frieda with 
the whip in her hand, and I among the crowd of servants. 
But it’s worse even than that ! Frieda may despise us, 
her position entitles her to do so, actual circumstances* 
compel it. But who is there who doesn't despise us ? 
Whoever decides to despise us will find himself in good 
company. Do you know Frieda's successor ? Pepi, she's 
called. I met her for the first time the night before last, 
she used to be a chambermaid. She certainly outdoes 



THE CASTLE 


245 

Frieda in her contempt for me. She saw me through 
the window as I was coming for beer, and ran to the 
door and locked it, so that I had to beg and pray for a 
long time and promise her the ribbon from my hair 
before she would let me in. But when I gave it to her 
she threw it into a corner. Well, I can't help it if she 
despises me, Tm partly dependent on her goodwill, and 
she's the barmaid in the Herrenhof. Only for the time 
being, it's Jrue, for she efertainly hasn't the qualities 
needed for permanent employment there. One only 
has to overhear how the landlord speaks to Pepi and 
compare it with his tone to Frieda. But that doesn't 
hinder Pepi from despising even Amalia, Amalia, whose 
glance alone would be enough to drive Pepi with all 
her plaits and ribbons out of the room much faster 
than her own fat legs would ever carry her. I had to 
listen again yesterday to her infuriating slanders against 
Amalia until the customers took my part at last, although 
only in the kind of way you have seen already." " How 
touchy you are," said K. " I only put Frieda in her 
right place, but I had no intention of belittling you, as 
you seem to think. Your family has a special interest 
for me, I have never denied it ; but how this interest 
could give me cause for despising you I can't under- 
stand." " Oh, K.," said Olga, " I'm afraid that even 
you will understand it yet ; can't you even understand 
that Amalia's behaviour to Sortini was the original 
cause of our being despised ? " " That would be strange 
•indeed," said K., " one might admire or condemn 
Amalia for such an action, but despise her ? And even 
if she is despised for some reason I can't comprehend, 
why should the contempt be extended to you others, 
her innocent family ? For Pepi to despise you, for 
instance, is a piece of impudence, and I'll let her know 



THE CASTLE 


246 

it if ever Tm in the Hcrrenhof again/' " If you set out, 
K./' said Olga, ‘‘ to convert all the people who despise 
us you'll have your work cut out for you, for it's all 
engineered from the Castle. I can still remember every 
detail of that day following the morning I spoke of. 
Brunswick, who was our assistant then, had arrived as 
usual, taken his share of the work and gone home, and 
we were sitting at breakfast, all of us, even Amalia and 
myself, very gay, father kept on talking abput the cele- 
bration and telling us his plans in connection with the 
Fire Brigade, for you must know that the Castle has its 
own Fire Brigade which had sent a deputation to the 
celebration, and there had been much discussion about 
it, the gentlemen present from the Castle had seen that 
performance of our Fire Brigade, had expressed great 
approval, and compared the Castle Brigade unfavour- 
ably with ours, so there had been some talk of reorganis- 
ing the Castle Brigade with the help of instructors from 
the village ; there were several possible candidates, 
but father had hopes that he would be chosen. That 
was what he was discussing, and in his usual delightful 
way had sprawled over the table until he embraced half 
of it in his arms, and as he gazed through the open 
window at the sky his face was young and shining with 
hope, and that was the last time I was to see it like that. 
Then Amalia, with a calm conviction we had never 
noticed in her before, said that too much trust shouldn't 
be placed in what the gentlemen said, they were in the 
habit of saying pleasant things on such occasions, bu^ 
it meant little or nothing, the words were hardly out 
of their mouths before they were forgotten, only of 
course people were always ready to be taken in again 
next time. Mother forbade her to say things like that, 
but father only laughed at her precocious air of wisdom. 



THE CASTLE 


247 

then he gave a start, and seemed to be looking round 
for something he had only just missed— but there was 
nothing missing— and said tliat Brunswick had told him 
some story of a messenger and a torn-up letter, did we 
know anything of it, who was concerned in it, and what 
it was all about 7 We kept silent ; Barnabas, who was 
as youthful then as a spring Iamb, said something 
particularly silly or cheeky, the subject was changed, 
and the whole affair forgottefi/* 

Amalia’s Punishment 

** But not long afterwards we were overwhelmed 
with questions from all sides about the story of the 
letter, we were visited by friends and enemies, acquaint- 
ances and complete strangers. Not one of them stayed 
for any length of time, and our best friends were the 
quickest to go. Lasemann, usually so slow and dignified, 
came in hastily as if only to see the size of the room, 
one look round it and he was gone, it was like a horrible 
kind of children’s game when he fled, and father, 
shaking himself free from some other people, ran after 
him to the very door and then gave it up ; Brunswick 
came and gave notice, he said quite honestly that he 
wanted to set up in business for himself, a shrewd man, 
he knew how to seize the right moment ; customers 
came and hunted round father’s storeroom for the 
boots they had left to be repaired, at first father tried 
to persuade them to change their minds — and we all 
l^ficked him up as much as we could — but later he gave 
it up, and without saying a word helped them to find 
their belongings, line after line in the order-book was 
cancelled, the pieces of leather people had left with us 
were handed back, all debts owing us were paid, every- 
thing went smoothly without the slighest trouble, they 



THE CASTLE 


248 

asked for nothing better than to break every connection 
with us quickly and completely, even if they lost by it ; 
that counted for nothing. And finally, as we might 
have foreseen, Seemann appeared, the Captain of the 
Fire Brigade ; I can still see the scene before me, 
Seemann, tall and stout, but with a slight stoop from 
weakness in the lungs, a serious man who never could 
laugh, standing in front of my father whom he admired, 
whom he had promised in ^confidence to make a deputy 
Captain, and to whom he had now to say that the 
Brigade required his services no longer and asked for 
the return of his diploma. All the people who happened 
to be in our house left their business for the moment 
and crowded round the two men, Seemann found it 
difficult to speak and only kept on tapping father on 
the shoulder, as if he were trying to tap out of him 
the words he ought to say and couldn't find. And he 
kept on laughing, probably to cheer himself a little 
and everybody else, but since he's incapable of laughing 
and no one had ever heard him laugh, it didn't occur 
to anybody that he was really laughing. But father 
was too tired and desperate after the day he'd had to 
help anybody out, he looked even too tired to grasp 
what was happening. We were all in despair, too, but 
being young didn't believe in the completeness of our 
ruin, and kept on expecting that someone in the long 
procession of visitors would arrive and put a stop to it 
all and make everything swing the other way again. 
In our foolishness we thought that Seemann was th^ 
very man. We were all keyed up waiting for his laughter 
to stop, and for the decisive statement to come out at 
last. What could he be laughing at, if not at the stupid 
injustice of what had happened to us ? Oh, Captain, 
Captain, tell them now at last, we thought, and pressed 



THE CASTLE 


249 

close to him, but that only made him recoil from us 
in the most curious way. At length, however, he did 
begin to speak, in response not to our secret wishes, 
but to the encouraging or angry cries of the crowd. 
Yet still we had hopes. He began with great praise 
for our father. Called him an ornament to the Brigade, 
an inimitable model to posterity, an indispensable 
member whose removal must reduce the Brigade almost 
to ruin. Tl^it was all very -fine, had he stopped there. 
But he went on to say that since in spite of that the 
Brigade had decided, only as a temporar)^ measure of 
course, to ask for his resignation, they would all under- 
stand the seriousness of the reason which forced the 
Brigade to do so. Perhaps if father had not distin- 
guished himself so much at the celebration of the 
previous day it would not have been necessary to go 
so far, but his very superiority had drawn official 
attention to the Brigade, and brought it into such 
prominence that the spotlessness of its reputation was 
more than ever a matter of honour to it. And now 
that a messenger had been insulted, the Brigade 
couldn't help itself, and he, Seemann, found himself 
in the difficult position of having to convey its decision. 
He hoped that father would not make it any more 
difficult for him. Seemann was glad to have got it out. 
He was so pleased with himself that he even forgot 
his exaggerated tact, and pointed to the diploma 
hanging on the wall and made a sign with his finger, 
ftther nodded and went to fetch it, but his hands 
trembled so much that he couldn't get it off the hook. 
I climbed on a chair and helped him. From that 
moment he was done for, he didn't even take the 
diploma out of its frame, but handed the whole thing 
over to Seemann. Then he sat down in a corner and 



THE CASTLE 


Z50 

neither moved nor spoke to anybody, and we had to 
attend to the last people there by ourselves as well as 
we could/* And where do you see in all this the 
influence of the Castle ? asked K. '' So far it doesn*t 
seem to have come in. What youVe told me about is 
simply the ordinary senseless fear of the people, malicious 
pleasure in hurting a neighbour, specious friendship, 
things that can be found anywhere, and, I must say, 
on the part of your father — at least, so„ it seems to 
me — a certain pettiness, for what was the diploma? 
Merely a testimonial to his abilities, these themselves 
weren*t taken from him, if they made him indispensable 
so much the better, and the one way he could have 
made things difficult for the Captain would have been 
by flinging the diploma at his feet before he had said 
two words. But the significant thing to me is that you 
haven't mentioned Amalia at all ; Amalia, who was 
to blame for everything, apparently stood quietly in 
the background and watched the whole house collapse." 
" No," said Olga, " nobody ought to be blamed, 
nobody could have done anything else, all that was 
already due to the influence of the Castle." " Influence 
of the Castle," repeated Amalia, who had slipped in 
unnoticed from the courtyard ; the old people had 
been long in bed. "Is it Castle gossip you're at? 
Still sitting with your heads together ? And yet you 
wanted to go away immediately you came, K., and 
it's nearly ten now. Are you really interested in that 
kind of gossip ? There are people in the village wht> 
live on it, they stick their heads together just like you 
two and entertain each other by the hour. But I 
didn't think you were one of them." " On the con- 
trary," said K., " that's exactly what I am, and more- 
over people who don't care for such gossip and leave 



THE CASTLE 


251 

it all to others don’t interest me particularly.” ” In- 
deed,” said Amalia, ” well, there are many different 
1 4 kinds of interest, you know ; I heard once of a young 
man who thought of nothing but the Castle day and 
night, he neglected everything else and people feared 
for his reason, his mind was so wholly absorbed by 
the Castle. It turned out at length, however, that it 
wasn’t really the Castle he was thinking of, but the 
daughter of a charwoman irf the offices up there, so 
he got the girl and was all right again.” ” I think I 
would like that man,” said K. ” As for your liking 
the man, I doubt it,” said Amalia, ” it's probably his 
wife you would like. Well, don’t let me disturb you, 
I’ve got to go to bed, and I must put out the light for 
the old folks’ sake. They’re sound asleep now, but 
they don’t really sleep for more than an hour, and 
after that the smallest glimmer disturbs them. Good- 
night.” And actually the light went out at once, and 
Amalia bedded herself somewhere on the floor near 
her parents. ” Who’s the young man she mentioned ? ” 
asked K. ” I don’t know,” said Olga, ” perhaps 
Brunswick although it doesn’t fit him exactly, but it 
might have been somebody else. It’s not easy to follow 
her, for often one can’t tell whether she’s speaking 
ironically or in earnest. Mostly she’s in earnest but 
sounds ironical.” ” Never mind explaining,” said K. 

“ How have you come to be so dependent on her ? 
Were things like that before the catastrophe ? Or did 
it*happen later ? And do you never feel that you want 
to be independent of her ? And is there any sense in 
your dependence ? She’s the youngest, and should 
give way to you. Innocently or not, she was the person 
who brought ruin on the family. And instead of 
begging your pardon for it anew every day she carries 



THE CASTLE 


252 

her head higher than anybody else, bothers herself 
about nothing except what she chooses to do for her 
parents, nothing would induce her to become ac- ; 
quainted with your affairs, to use her own expression, 
and then if she does speak to you at all she's mostly in 
earnest, but sounds ironical. Does she queen it over 
you on account of her beauty, which you've mentioned 
more than once ? Well, you're all three very like each 
other, but Amalia's distinguishing mark is hardly a 
recommendation, and repelled me the first time I saw 
it, I mean her cold hard eye. And although she's the 
youngest she doesn't look it, she has the ageless look of 
women who seem not to grow any older, but seem 
never to have been young either. You see her every 
day, you don't notice the hardness of her face. That's 
why, on reflection, I can't take Sortini's passion for 
her very seriously, perhaps he sent the letter simply to 
punish her, but not to summon her." " I won't argue 
about Sort ini," said Olga, " for the Castle gentlemen 
everything is possible, let a girl be as pretty or as ugly 
as you like. But in all the rest you're utterly mistaken 
so far as Amalia is concerned. I have no particular 
motive for winning you over to Amalia's side, and if I 
try to do it it's only for your own sake. Amalia in 
some way or other was the cause of our misfortunes, 
that's true, but not even my father, who was the hardest 
hit, and who was never very sparing of his tongue, 
particularly at home, not even my father has ever said 
a word of reproach to Amalia even in our very wofst 
times. Not because he approved of her action, he was 
an admirer of Sortini, and how could he have approved 
of it ? He couldn't understand it even remotely, for 
Sortini he would have been glad to sacrifice himself 
and all that was his, although hardly in the way 



THE CASTLE 


253 

things actually happened, as an outcome apparently of 
Sortini's anger. I say apparently, for we never heard 
another word from Sortini ; if he was reticent before 
then, from that day on he might as well have been 
dead. Now, you should have seen Amalia at that 
time. We all knew that no definite *punishment would 
be visited on us. We were only shunned. By the village 
and by the Castle. But while we couldn't help noticing 
the ostracism pf the village, the Castle gave us no sign. 
Of course we had no sign of favour from the Castle in 
the past, so how could we notice the reverse ? This 
blankness was the worst of all. It was far worse than 
the withdrawal of the people down here, for they 
hadn't deserted us out of conviction, perhaps they had 
nothing very serious against us, they didn't despise us 
then as they do to-day, they only did it out of fear, and 
were waiting to see what would happen next. And 
we weren't afraid of being stranded, for all our debtors 
had paid us, the settling-up had been entirely in our 
favour, and any provisions we didn't have were sent 
us secretly by relations, it was easy enough for us, it 
was harvest time — though we had no fields of our own 
and nobody would take us on as workers, so that for 
the first time in our lives we were condemned to go 
nearly idle. So there we sat all together with the 
windows shut in the heats of July and August. Nothing 
happened. No invitations, no news, no callers, nothing." 
" Well," said K., " since nothing happened and you 
had no definite punishment hanging over you, what 
was there to be afraid of ? What people you are ! 

“ How am I to explain it ? " said Olga. " We weren't 
afraid of anything in the future, we were suffering 
under the immediate present, we were actually enduring 
our punishment. The others in the village were only 



THE CASTLE 


254 

waiting for us to come to them, for father to open his 
workshop again, for Amalia, who could sew the most 
beautiful clothes, fit for the best families, to come asking 
for orders again, they were all sorry to have had to act 
as they did ; when a respected family is suddenly cut 
out of village life it means a loss for everybody, so when 
they broke with us they thought they were only doing 
their duty, in their place we should have done just the 
same. They didn’t knoW very clearly ^yhat was the 
matter, except that the messenger had returned to the 
Herrenhof with a handful of tom paper. Frieda had 
seen him go out and come back, had exchanged a few 
words with him, and then spread what she had learned 
everywhere. But not in the least from enmity to us, 
simply from a sense of duty which anybody would have 
felt in the same circumstances. And, as I’ve said, a 
happy ending to the whole story would have pleased 
everybody else. If we had suddenly put in an appear- 
ance with the news that everything was settled, that 
it had only been a misunderstanding, say, which was 
now quite cleared up, or that there had been actually 
some cause for offence which had now been made good, 
or else — and even this would have satisfied people — 
that through our influence in the Castle the affair had 
been dropped, we should certainly have been received 
again with open arms, there would have been kissings 
and congratulations, I have seen that kind of thing 
happen to others once or twice already. And it 
wouldn’t have been necessary to say even as much^as 
that ; if we had only come out in the open and shown 
ourselves, if we had picked up our old connections 
without letting fall a single word about the affair of 
the letter, it would have been enough, they would all 
have been glad to avoid mentioning the matter ; it 



THE CASTLE 


255 

was the painfulness of the subject as much as their fear 
that made them draw away from us, simply to avoid 
hearing about it or speaking about^ it or thinking about 
it or being affected by it in any way. When Frieda 
gave it away it wasn’t out of mischief but as a warning, 
to let the parish know that something had happened 
which everybody should be careful to keep clear of. 
It wasn’t our family that was taboo, it was the affair, 
and our family only in so faS: as we were mixed up in 
the affair. So if we had quietly come forward again 
and let bygones be bygones and shown by our behaviour 
that-the incident was closed, no matter in what way, 
and reassured public opinion that it was never likely 
to be mentioned again, whatever its nature had been, 
everything would have been made all right in that 
way, too, we should have found friends on all sides as 
before, and even if we hadn’t completely forgotten 
what had happened people would have understood 
and helped us to forget it completely. Instead of that 
we sat in the house. I don’t know what we were 
expecting, probably some decision from Amalia, for on 
that morning she had taken the lead in the family and 
she still maintained it. Without any particular con- 
triving or commanding or imploring, almost by her 
silence alone. We others, of course, had plenty to 
discuss, there was a steady whispering from morning 
till evening, and sometimes father would call me to 
him in sudden panic and I would have to spend half 
the night on the edge of his bed. Or we would often 
crc*ep away together, I and Barnabas, who knew 
nothing about it all at first, and was always in a fever 
for some explanation, always the same, for he realised 
well enough that the care-free years that others of his 
age looked forward to were now out of the question 



THE CASTLE 


256 

for him, so wc used to put our heads together, K., just 
like we two now, and forget that it was night, and that 
morning had come again. Our mother was the feeblest 
of us dl, probably because she had not only endured 
our common sorrows but the private sorrow of each of 
us, and so we were horrified to see changes in her which, 
as we guessed, lay in wait for all of us. Her favourite 
seat was the corner of the sofa, it*s long since we parted 
with it, it stands now in 'Brunswick's big living-room, 
well, there she sat and — we couldn't tell exactly what 
was wrong — used to doze or carry on long conversa- 
tions with herself, we guessed it from the moving of her 
lips. It was so natural for us to be always discussing 
the letter, to be always turning it over in all its known 
details and unknown potentialities, and to be always 
outdoing each other in thinking out plans for restoring 
our fortunes ; it was natural and unavoidable, but not 
good, we only plunged deeper and deeper into what we 
wanted to escape from. And what good were these 
inspirations, however brilliant ? None of them could 
be acted on without Amalia, they were all tentative, 
and quite useless because they stopped short of Amalia, 
and even if they had been put to Amalia they would 
have met with nothing but silence. Well, I'm glad to 
say I understand .Amalia better now than I did then, 
she had more to endure than all of us, it*s incompre- 
hensible how she managed to endure it and still survive. 
Mother, perhaps, had to endure all our troubles, but 
that was because they came pouring in on her ; afid 
she didn't hold out for long ; no one could say that 
she's holding out against them to-day, and even at that 
time her mind was beginning to go. But Amalia not 
only suffered, she had the understanding to see her 
suffering clearly, we saw only the effects, but she knew > 



THE CASTLE 


^57 

the cause, we hop^ for some small relief or other, she 
knew that everything was decided, we had to whisper, 
she had only to be silent. She stood face to face with 
the truth and went on living and endured her life then 
as now. In all our straits* we were better oflF than she. 
Of course, we had to leave our house. Brunswick took 
it on, and we were given this cottage, we brought our 
things over in several journeys with a handcart, Barna- 
bas and I pulling and father and Amalia pushing 
behind, mother was already sitting here on a chest, 
for we had brought her here first, and she whimpered 
softly all the time. Yet I remember that even during 
those toilsome journeys — they were painful, too, for we 
often met harvest waggons, and the people became 
silent when they saw us and turned away their faces — 
even during those journeys Barnabas and I couldn't stop 
discussing our troubles and our plans, so that we often 
stood stock still in the middle of pulling and had to be 
roused by father's * Hallo ' from behind. But all our 
talking made no difference to our life after the removal, 
except that we began gradually to feel the pinch of 
poverty as well. Our relatives stopped sending us 
things, our money was almost done, and that was the 
time when people first began to despise us in the way 
you can see now. They saw that we hadn't the strength 
to shake ourselves clear of the scandal, and they were 
irritated. They didn't underestimate our difficulties, 
although they didn't know exactly what they were, and 
they knew that probably they wouldn't have stood up 
to them any better themselves, but that made it only 
^1 the more needful to keep clear of us — if we had 
triumphed they would have honoured us correspond- 
ingly, but since we failed they turned what had only 
heen a temporary measure* into a final resolve, and cut 
9 



THE CASTLE 


258 

US off from the community for ever. We were no longer 
spoken of as ordinary human beings, our very name 
was never mentione^, if they had to refer to us they 
called us Barnabas's jpeople, for he was the least guilty ; 
even our cottage gained in evil reputation, and you 
yourself must admit, if you're honest, that on your 6rst 
entry into it you thought it justified its reputation ; 
later on, when people occasionally visited us again, they 
used to screw up their n<»ses at the nK>st trivial things, 
for instance, because the little oil-lamp hung over the 
table. Where should it hang if not over the table ? and 
yet they found it insupportable. But if we hung the 
lamp somewhere else they were still disgusted. What- 
ever we did, whatever we had, it was all despicable." 

Petitions 

" And what did we do meanwhile ? The worst thing 
we could have done, something much more deserving 
of contempt than our original offence — we betrayed 
Amalia, we shook off her silent restraint, we couldn't 
go on living like that, without hope of any kind we could 
not live, and we began each in his or her own fashion 
with prayers or blustering to beg the Castle's forgive- 
ness. We knew, of course, that we weren't in a position 
to make anything good, and we knew too that the only 
likely connection we had with the Castle — through 
Sortini, who had been father's superior and had ap- 
proved of him — was destroyed by what had happened, 
and yet we buckled down to the job. Father begar^it, 
he started making senseless petitions to the Vil/age 
Superintendent, to the secretaries, the advocates, the 
clerks, usually he wasn't received at all, but if by guile 
or chance he managed to get a hearing — and how wc 
used to exult when the news came, and rub our hands ! 



THE CASTLE 


259 


—he was always thrown out immediately and never 
admitted again. Besides, it was only too easy to answer 
him, the Castle always has the ativantage. What was 
it that he wanted? What had 'been done to him? 
What did he want to be forgiven for ? When and by 
whom had so much as a finger been raised against him 
in the Castle ? Granted he had become poor and lost 
his customers, etc., these were all chances of everyday 
life, and happened in all shefps and markets ; was the 
Castle to concern itself about things of that kind? It 
concerned itself about the common welfare, of course, 
but it couldn't simply interfere with the natural course 
of events for the sole purpose of serving the interest of 
one man. Did he expect officials to be sent out to run 
after his customers and force them to come back ? But, 
father would object — ^we always discussed the whole 
interview both before and afterwards, sitting in a corner 
as if to avoid Amalia, who knew well enough what we 
were doing, but paid no attention — well, father would 
object, he wasn't complaining about his poverty, he 
could easily make up again for all he had lost, that 
didn't matter if only he were forgiven. But what was 
there to forgive ? came the answer ; no accusation 
had come in against him, at least there was none in the 
registers, not in those registers anyhow which were 
accessible to the public advocates, consequently, so far 
as could be established, there was neither any accusa- 
tion standing against him, nor one in process of being 
taken up. Could he perhaps refer to some official 
decree that had been issued against him ? Father 
couldn't do that. Well then, if he knew of nothing and 
nothing had happened, what did he want ? What was 
there to forgive him ? Nothing but the way he was 
aimlessly wasting official time, but that was just the 



THE CASTLE 


260 

unforgivable sin. Father didn't give in, he was still 
very strong in those days, and his enforced leisure gave 
him plenty of time, f, * I'll restore Amalia's honour, it 
won’t take long now, he used to say to Barnabas and 
me several times a day, but only in a low voice in case 
Amalia should hear, and yet he only said it for her 
benefit, for in reality he wasn’t hoping for the restora- 
tion of her honour, but only for forgiveness. Yet before 
he could be forgiven he had to prove his guilt, and that 
was denied in all the bureaux. He hit upon the idea — 
and it showed that his mind was already giving way — 
that his guilt was being concealed from him because he 
didn’t pay enough ; until then he had paid only the 
established taxes, which were at least high enough for 
means like ours. But now he believed that he must 
pay more, which was certainly a delusion, for, although 
our officials accept bribes simply to avoid trouble and 
discussion, nothing is ever achieved in that way. Still, 
if father had set his hopes on that idea, we didn’t want 
them upset. We sold what we had left to sell — nearly 
all things we couldn’t do without — to get father the 
money for his efforts, and for a long time every morning 
brought us the satisfaction of knowing that when he 
went on his day’s rounds he had at least a few coins to 
rattle in his pocket. Of course we simply starved all 
day, and the only thing the money really did was to 
keep father fairly hopeful and happy. That could 
hardly be called an advantage, however. He wore 
himself out on these rounds of his, and the money only 
made them drag on and on instead of coming to a quick 
and natural end. Since in reality nothing extra could 
be done for him in return for those extra payments, 
clerks here and there tried to make a pretence of giving 
something in return, promising to look the matter up, 



THE CASTLE 


261 

and hinting that they were on the track of something, 
and that purely as a favour to father, and not as a duty, 
they would follow it up— and fathtr, instead of growing 
sceptical, only became more and inore credulous. He 
used to bring home such obviously worthless promises 
as if they were great triumphs, and it was a torment to 
see him behind Amalia's back twisting his face in a 
smile and opening his eyes wide as he pointed to her 
and made sigjns to us that Hfer salvation, which would 
have surprised nobody so much as herself, was coming 
nearer and nearer through his efforts, but that it was 
still a secret and we mustn't tell. Things would certainly 
have gone on like this for a long time if we hadn't 
finally been reduced to the position of having no more 
money to give him. Barnabas, indeed, had been taken 
on meanwhile by Brunswick, after endless imploring, 
as an assistant, on condition that he fetched his work 
in the dusk of the evening and brought it back again 
in the dark — it must be admitted that Brunswick was 
taking a certain risk in his business for our sake, but in 
exchange he paid Barnabas next to nothing, and Barna- 
bas is a model workman — ^yet his wages were barely 
enough to keep us from downright starvation. Very 
gently and after much softening of the blow we told our 
father that he could have no more money, but he took 
It very quietly. He was no longer capable of under- 
standing how hopeless were his attempts at intervention, 
but he was wearied out by continual disappointments. 
Hj said, indeed — and he spoke less clearly than before, 
he used to speak almost too clearly — that he would have 
needed only a very little more money, for to-morrow 
or that very day he would have found out everything, 
and now it had all gone for nothing, ruined simply for 
lack of money, and so on but the tone in which he said 



262 THE CASTLE 

it showed that he didn't believe it all. Besides, he 
brought out a new plan immediately of his own accord. 
Since he had failed | in proving his guilt, and conse- 
quently could hope Tor nothing more through oflScial 
channels, he would have to depend on appeals alone, 
and would try to move the officials persondly. There 
must certainly be some among them who had good 
sympathetic hearts, which they couldn't give way to in 
their official capacity, but out of offjee hours, if 
one caught them at the right time, they would surely 
listen." 

Here K., who had listened with absorption hitherto, 
interrupted Olga's narrative with the question : " And 
don't you think he was right ? " Although his question 
would have answered itself in the course of the narrative 
he wanted to know at once. 

" No," said Olga, " there could be no question of 
sympathy or anything of the kind. Young and inex- 
perienced as we were, we knew that, and father knew 
it too, of course, but he had forgotten it like nearly 
everything else. The plan he had hit on was to plant 
himself on the main road neai the Castle, where the 
officials pass in their carriages, and seize any oppor- 
tunity of putting up his prayer for forgiveness. To be 
honest, it was a wild and senseless plan, even if the 
impossible should have happened, and his prayer have 
really reached an official's ear. For how could a single 
official give a pardon ? That could only be done at 
best by the whole authority, and apparently even ffic 
authority can only condemn and not pardon. And in 
any case even if an official stepped out of his carriage 
and was willing to take up the matter, how could he 
get any clear idea of the affair from the mumblings of 
a poor, tired, ageing man like father ? Officials are 



THE CASTLE 


26^ 

highly educated, but one-sided ; in his own depart- 
ment an official can grasp whole trains of thought from 
a single word, but let him have soriething from another 
department explained to him by tlJe hour, he may nod 
politely, but he won't understand a word of it. That's 
quite natural, take even the small official affairs that 
concern the ordinary persoh — trifling things that an 
official disposes of with a shrug — and try to understand 
one of them through and thiough, and you'll waste a 
>\'hoIe lifetime on it without result. But even if father 
had chanced on a responsible official, no official can 
settle anything without the necessary documents, and 
certainly not on the main road ; he can't pardon any- 
thing, he can only settle it officially, and he would 
simply refer to the official procedure, which had already 
been a complete failure for father. What a pass father 
must have been in to think of insisting on such a plan I 
If there were even the faintest possibility of getting any- 
thing in that way, that part of the road would be packed 
with petitioners ; but since it's a sheer impossibility, 
patent to the youngest schoolboy, the road is absolutely 
empty. But maybe even that strengthened father in 
his hopes, he found food for them everywhere. He had 
great need to find it, for a sound mind wouldn't have 
had to make such complicated calculations, it would 
have realised from external evidence that the thing was 
impossible. When officials travel to the village or back 
to the Castle it's not for pleasure, but because there's 
wo#k waiting for them in the village or in the Castle, 
and so they travel at a great pace. It's not likely to 
occur to them to look out of the carriage windows in 
search of petitioners, for the carriages are crammed 
with papers which they study on the way." 

‘‘ But," said K., " I've seen the inside of an official 



THE CASTLE 


264 

sledge in which there weren't any papers/' Olga's 
story was opening for him such a great and almost 
incredible world tHit he could not help trying to 
put his own small « experiences in relation to it, as 
much to convince himself of its reality as of his own 
existence. 

That's possible," said Olga, " but in that case it's 
even worse, for that means that the ofiBcial's business 
is so important that the Y)apers are too precious or too 
numerous to be taken with him, and those officials go 
at a gallop. In any case, none of them can spare time 
for father. And besides, there are several roads to the 
Castle. Now one of them is in fashion, and most 
carriages go by that, now it's another and everything 
drives pell-mell there. And what governs this change 
of fashion has never yet been found out. At eight 
o'clock one morning they'll all be on another road, ten 
minutes later on a third, and half an hour after that 
on the first road again, and then they may stick to that 
road all day, but every minute there's the possibility 
of a change. Of course all the roads join up near the 
village, but by that time all the carriages are racing like 
mad, while nearer the Castle the pace isn't quite so fast. 
And the amount of traffic varies just as widely and 
incomprehensively as the choice of roads. There are 
often days when there's not a carriage to be seen, and 
others when they travel in crowds. Now, just think of 
all that in relation to father. In his best suit, which 
soon becomes his only suit, oflF he goes every morning 
from the house with our best wishes. He takes with 
him a small Fire Brigade badge, which he has really 
no business to keep, to stick in his coat once he's out 
of the village, for in the village itself he's afraid to let 
it be seen, although it's so small that it can hardly be 



THE CASTLE 


265 

seen two paces away, but father insists that it's just the 
thing to draw a passing official's attention. Not far 
from the Castle entrance there'k a market garden, 
belonging to a man called BertucW who sells vegetables 
to the Castle, and there on the narrow stone ledge at 
the foot of the garden fence father took up his post. 
Bertuch made no objection because he used to be very 
friendly with father and had been one of his most 
faithful custopiers— you see, Me has a lame foot, and he 
thought that nobody but father could make him a boot 
to fit it. Well, there sat father day after day, it was a 
wet and stormy autumn, but the weather meant nothing 
to him. In the morning at his regular hour he had his 
hand on the latch and waved us good-bye, in the 
evening he came back soaked to the skin, every day, it 
seemed, a little more bent, and flung himself down in 
a corner. At first he used to tell us all his little adven- 
tures, such as how Bertuch for sympathy and old 
friendship's sake had thrown him a blanket over the 
fence, or that in one of the passing carriages he thought 
he had recognised this or the other official, or that 
this or the other coachman had recognised him again 
and playfully flicked him with his whip. But later he 
stopped telling us these things, evidently he had given 
up all hope of ever achieving anything there, and 
looked on it only as his duty, his dreary job, to go there 
and spend the whole day. That was when his rheumatic 
pains began, winter was coming on, snow fell early, 
th| winter begins very early here ; well, so there he 
sat sometimes on wet stones and at other times in the 
snow. In the night he groaned with pain, and in the 
morning he was many a time uncertain whether to go 
or not, but always overcame his reluctance and went. 
Mother clung to him and didn't want to let him go. 



266 


THE CASTLE 


SO he, apparently grown timid because his limbs 
wouldn't obey him, allowed her to go with him, and so 
mother began to get i^ains too. We often went out to 
them, to take them food, or merely to visit them, or to 
try to persuade them to come back home ; how often 
we found them crouching together, leaning against 
each other on their narrow scat, huddled up under 
a thin blanket which scarcely covered them, and round 
about them nothing but 'the grey of snow and mist, 
and far and wide for days at a time not a soul to be 
seen, not a carriage ; a sight that was, K., a sight to 
be seen ! Until one morning father couldn't move his 
stiff legs out of bed at all, he wasn't to be comforted, 
in a slight delirium he thought he could see an official 
stopping his carriage beside Bcrtuch's just at that 
moment, hunting all along the fence for him and then 
climbing angrily into his carriage again with a shake 
of his head. At that father shrieked so loudly that it 
was as if he wanted to make the official hear him at all 
that distance, and to explain how blameless his absence 
was. And it became a long absence, he never went 
back again, and for weeks he never left his bed. Amalia 
took over the nursing, the attending, the treatment, did 
everything he needed, and with a few intervals has kept 
it up to this day. She knows healing herbs to soothe 
his pain, she needs hardly any sleep, she's never alarmed, 
never afraid, never impatient, she does everything for 
the old folks ; while we were fluttering round uneasily 
without being able to help in anything she rcmaii^d 
cool and quiet whatever happened. Then when the 
worst was past and father was able again to struggle 
cautiously out of bed with one of us supporting him on 
each side, Amalia withdrew into the background again 
and left him to us." 



THE CASTLE 


267 


Olga's Plans 

*' Now it was necessaty again to^find some occupation 
for father that he was still fit for, something that at least 
would make him believe that he was helping to remove 
the burden of guilt from our family* Somediing of the 
kind was not hard to find, anything at all in fact would 
have been as useful for the purpose as sitting in Bertuch's 
garden, but \ found something that actually gave me 
a little hope. Whenever there had been any talk of our 
guilt among officials or clerks or anybody else, it was 
only the insult to Sortini's messenger that had always 
been brought up, further than that nobody dared to 
go. Now, I said to myself, since public opinion, even 
if only ostensibly, recognised nothing but the insult to 
the messenger, then, even if it were still only ostensibly, 
everything might be put right if one could propitiate 
the messenger. No charge had actually been made, 
we were told, no department therefore had taken up 
the affair yet, and so the messenger was at liberty, as 
far as he was concerned — and there was no question 
of anything more — to forgive the offence. All that of 
course couldn't have any decisive importance, was mere 
semblance and couldn't produce in turn anything but 
semblance, but all the same it would cheer up my father 
and might help to harass the swarm of clerks who had 
been tormenting him, and that would be a satisfaction. 
First of course one had to find the messenger. When 
1 told father of my plan, at first he was very annoyed, 
for to tell the truth he had become terribly self-willed ; 
for one thing he was convinced — this happened during 
his illness — that we had always held him back from final 
success, first by stopping his allowance and then by 
keeping him in his bed; and for another he was no 



THE CASTLE 


268 

longer capable of completely understanding any new 
idea. My plan was turned down even before I had 
finished telling him hbout it, he was convinced that his 
job was to go on waiting in Bertuch's garden, aud as 
he was in no state now to go there every day himself, 
we should have to push him there in a hand-barrow. 
But I didn't give in, and gradually he became reconciled 
to the idea, the only thing that disturbed him was that 
in this matter he was quire dependent on, me, for I had 
been the only one who had seen the messenger, he did 
not know him. Actually one messenger is very like 
another, and I myself was not quite certain that I would 
know this one again. Presently we began to go to the 
Herrenhof and look round among the servants. The 
messenger of course had been in Sortini's service and 
Sortini had stopped coming to the village, but the 
gentlemen are continually changing their servants, one 
might easily find our man among the servants of another 
gentleman, and even if he himself was not to be found, 
still one might perhaps get news of him from the other 
servants. For this purpose it was of course necessary 
to be in the Herrenhof every evening, and people weren’t 
very pleased to see us anywhere, far less in a place like 
that ; and we couldn’t appear either as paying cus- 
tomers. But it turned out that they could put us to 
some use all the same. You know what a trial the 
servants were to Frieda, at bottom they are mostly quiet 
people, but pampered and made lazy by too little work 
— ‘ May you be as well off as a servant ' is a favouStc 
toast among the officials — and really, as far as an easy 
life goes, tfie servants seem to be the real masters in 
the Castle, they know their own dignity too, and in the 
Castle, where they have to behave in accordance with 
their regulations, they’re quiet and dignified, several 



THE CASTLE 


269 

times Tvc been assured of that, and one can find even 
among the servants down here some faint signs of that, 
but only faint signs, for usually, *eing that the Castle 
regulations aren’t fully binding out them in the village, 
they seem quite changed ; a wild unmanageable lot, 
ruled by their insatiable impulses instead of by theii 
regulations. Their scandalous behaviour knows no 
limits, it’s lucky for the village that they can't leave 
the Herrenhof without permisSion, but in the Herrenhof 
itself one must try to get on with them somehow ; Frieda, 
for instance, felt that very hard to do and so she was 
very glad to employ me to quieten the servants. For 
more than two years, at least twice a week, Tve spent 
the night with the servants in the stalls. Earlier, when 
father was still able to go to the Herrenhof with me, 
he slept somewhere in the taproom, and in that way 
waited for the news that I would bring in the morning. 
There wasn't much to bring We've never found the 
messenger to this day, he must be still with Sortini who 
values him very highly, and he must have followed 
Sortini when Sortini retired to a more remote bureau. 
Most of the servants haven't seen him since we saw him 
last ourselves, and when one or other claims to have 
seen him it's probably a mistake. So my plan might 
have actually failed, and yet it hasn't failed completely ; 
It's true we haven't found the messenger, and going to 
the Herrenhof and spending the night there — perhaps 
his pity for me, too, any pity that he's still capable of — 
hay unfortunately ruined my father, and for two years 
now he has been in the state you've seen him in, and 
yet things are perhaps better with him than with my 
mother, for we're waiting daily for her death ; it has 
only been put oflF thanks to Amalia's superhuman efforts. 
But what I've achieved in the Herrenliof is a certain 



THE CASTLE 


270 

connection with the Castle ; don't despise me when 
I say that I don't repent what I've done. What con- 
ceivable sort of a connection with the Castle can this be, 
you'll no doubt be tttinking ; and you're right, it's not 
much of a connection. I know a great many of the 
servants now, of course, almost all the gentlemen's 
servants who have come to the village during the last 
two years, and if I should ever get into the Castle I shan't 
be a stranger there. Of ^course they're servants only 
in the village, in the Castle they're quite different, and 
probably wouldn't know me or anybody else there that 
they've had dealings with in the village, that's quite 
certain, even if they have sworn a hundred times in the 
stall that they would be delighted to see me again in 
the Castle. Besides, I've already had experience of how 
little all these promises are worth. But still that's not 
the really important thing. It isn't only through the 
servants themselves that I have a connection with the 
Castle, for apart from that I hope and trust that what 
I'm doing is being noticed by someone up there — and 
the management of the staff of servants is really an 
extremely important and laborious official function— 
and that finally whoever is noticing me may perhaps 
arrive at a more favourable opinion of me than the 
others, that he may recognise that I'm fighting for my 
family and carrying on my father's efforts, no matter 
in how poor a way. If he should see it like that, perhaps 
he'll forgive me too for accepting money from the ser- 
vants and using it for our family. And I've achieif^d 
something more yet, which even you, I'm afraid, will 
blame me for. I learned a great deal from the servants 
about the ways in which one can get into the Castle 
service without going through the difficult preliminaries 
of official appointment lasting Sometimes for years ; 



THE CASTLE 


271 

in that case, it*s true, one doesn’t become an actual 
official employee, but only a private and semi-official 
one, one has neither rights nor auties — and the worst 
is not to have any duties — but olie advantage one does 
have, that one is on the spot, one can watch for favourable 
opportunities and take advantage of them, one may not 
be an employee, but by good luck some work may come 
one’s way, perhaps no real employee is handy, there's 
a call, one §ies to answer id, and one has become the 
very thing that one wasn't a minute before, an employee. 
Only, when is one likely to get a chance like that? 
Sometimes at once, one has hardly arrived, one has 
hardly had time to look round before the chance is 
there, and many a one hasn't even the presence of mind, 
being quite new to the job, to seize the opportunity ; 
but in another case one may have to wait for even more 
years than the official employees, and after being a 
semi-official servant for so long one can never be law- 
fully taken on afterwards as an official employee. So 
there's enough here to make one pause, but it sinks to 
nothing when one takes into account that the test for 
the official appointments is very stringent and that a 
member of any doubtful family is turned down in 
advance ; let us say someone like that goes in for the 
examination, for years he waits in fear and trembling 
for the result, from the very first day everybody asks 
him in amazement how he could have dared to do any- 
thing so wild, but he still goes on hoping — how else 
cjjfuld he keep alive ? — then after years and years, perhaps 
as an old man, he learns that he has been rejected, 
learns that everything is lost and that all his life has 
been in vain. Here, too, of course there are exceptions, 
that's how one is so easily tempted. It happens some- 
times that really shady customers are actually appointed. 



THE CASTLE 


272 

there arc officials who, literally in spite of themselves, 
are attracted by those ^utlaws ; at the entrance examina- 
tions they can't help sniffing the air, smacking their lips, 
and rolling their eyes towards an entrant like that, who 
seems in some way to be terribly appetising to them, 
and they have to stick close to their books of regulations 
so as to withstand him. Sometimes, however, that 
doesn't help the entrant to an appointment, but only 
leads to an endless postp'onement of the^ preliminary 
proceedings, which are never terminated, but only 
broken off by the death of the poor man. So official 
appointment no less than the other kind is full of obvious 
and concealed difficulties, and before one goes in for 
anything of the kind it's highly advisable to weigh 
everything carefully. Now, we didn't fail to do that, 
Barnabas and I. Every time that I came back from the 
Herrenhof we sat down together and I told the latest 
news that I had gathered, for days we talked it over, 
and Barnabas's work lay idle for longer spells than was 
good for it. And here I may be to blame in your opinion. 
I knew quite well that much reliance was not to be put on 
the servants' stories. I knew that they never had much 
inclination to tell me things about the Castle, that they 
always changed the subject, and that every word had 
to be dragged out of them, and then, when they were 
well started, that they let themselves go, talked nonsense, 
bragged, tried to surpass one another in inventing im- 
probable lies, so that in the continuous shouting in the 
dark stalls, one servant beginning where the other l^ft 
off, it was clear that at best only a few scanty scraps of 
truth could be picked up. But I repeated everything 
to Barnabas again just as I had heard it, though he still 
had no capacity whatever to distinguish between what 
was true and what was false, and on account of the 



TMfi CASTLfi 


^7} 

family position was almost famishing to hear all these 
things ; and he drank in everything and burned with 
eagerness for more. And as a matter of fact the corner- 
stone of my new plan was Barnabas. Nothing more 
could be done through the servants. Sortini*s messenger 
was not to be found and would never be found* Sortini 
and his messenger with him seemed to be receding 
farther and farther, by many people their appearance 
and names were already forj|otten, and often I had to 
describe them at length and in spite of that learn nothing 
more than that the servant I was speaking to could 
remember them with an effort, but except for that could 
tell nothing about them. And as for my conduct with 
the servants, of course I had no power to decide how 
it might be looked on and could only hope that the 
Castle would judge it in the spirit I did it in, and that 
in return a little of the guilt of our family would be taken 
away, but Tve received no outward sign of that. Still 
I stuck to it, for so far as I was concerned I saw no other 
chance of getting anything done for us in the Castle. 
But for Barnabas I saw another possibility. From the 
tales of the servants — if I had the inclination, and I had 
only too much inclination — could draw the conclusion 
that anyone who was taken into the Castle service could 
do a great deal for his family. But then what was there 
that was worthy of belief in these tales ? It was im- 
possible to make certain of that, but that there was very 
little was clear. For when, say, a servant that I would 
never see again, or that I would hardly recognise even 
were I to see him again, solemnly promised me to help 
to get my brother a post in the Castle, or at least, if 
Barnabas should come to the Castle on other business, 
to support him, or at least to back him up — for according 
to the servants' stories it sometimes happens that candi- 



THE CASTLE 


274 

dates for posts become unconscious or deranged during 
the protracted waiting and then they're lost if some 
friend doesn't look after them — ^when things like that 
and a great many more were told to me, they were 
probably justified as warnings, but the promises that 
accompanied them were quite baseless. But not to 
Barnabas ; it's true I warned him not to believe them, 
but my mere telling of them was enough to enlist him 
for my plan. The reasons* I advanced for it myself im- 
pressed him less, the thing that chiefly influenced him 
was the servants' stories. And so in reality I was com- 
pletely thrown back upon myself, Amalia was the only 
one who could make herself understood to my parents, 
and the more I followed, in my own way, the original 
plans of father, the more Amalia shut herself off from 
me, before you or anybody else she talks to me, but not 
when we're alone ; to the servants in the Herrenhof 
I was a plaything which in their fury they did their best 
to wreck, not one intimate word have I spoken with 
any of them during those two years. I've had only 
cunning or lying or silly words from them, so only 
Barnabas remained for me, and Barnabas was still very 
young. When I saw the light in his eyes as I told him 
those things, a light which has remained in them evei 
since, I felt terrified and yet I didn't stop, the things at 
stake seemed too great. I admit I hadn't my father's 
great though empty plans, I hadn't the resolution that 
men have, I confined myself to making good the insult 
to the messenger, and only asked that the actual modesty 
of my attempt should be put to my credit. But what I 
had failed to do by myself I wanted now to achieve in 
a different way and with certainty through Barnabas. 
We had insulted a messenger and driven him into a more 
remote bureau ; what was more natural than for us 



THE CASTLE 


275 

to offer a new messenger in the person of Barnabas, 
so that the other messenger's |vork might be carried 
on by him, and the other messenger might remain 
quietly in retirement as long as»he liked, for as long a 
time as he needed to forget the insult ? I was quite 
aware, of course, that in spite of all its modesty there 
was a hint of presumption in my plan, that it might 
give rise to the impression that we wanted to dictate 
to the autj^orities how they should decide a personal 
question, or that we doubted their ability to make the 
best arrangements, which they might have made long 
before we had struck upon the idea that something could 
be done. But then, I thought again that it was impossible 
that the authorities should misunderstand me so grossly, 
or if they should, that they should do so intentionally, 
than in other words all that I did should be turned down 
in advance without further examination. So I did not 
give in and Barnabas's ambition kept him from giving 
in. In this term of preparation Barnabas became so 
uppish that he found that cobbling was far too menial 
work for him, a future bureau employee, yes, he even 
dared to contradict Amalia, and flatly, on the few occa- 
sions that she spoke to him about it. I didn't grudge 
him this brief happiness, for with the first day that he 
went to the Castle his happiness and his arrogance would 
be gone, a thing easy enough to foresee. And now began 
that parody of service of which Tve told you already. 
It was amazing with what little difficulty Barnabas got 
into the Castle that first time, or more correctly into the 
bureau which in a manner of speaking has become his 
workroom. This success drove me almost frantic at the 
time, when Barnabas whispered the news to me in the 
evening after he came home. I ran to Amalia, seized 
her, drew her into a corner, and kissed her so wildly that 



THE CASTLE 


276 

she cried with pain and terror. I could explain nothing 
for excitement, and th^ it had been so long since we 
had spoken to each other, so I put oflF telling her until 
next day or the day aftfer. For the next few days, how- 
ever, there was really nothing more to tell. After the 
first quick success nothing more happened. For two 
long years Barnabas led this heart-breaking life. The 
servants failed us completely, I gave Barnabas a short 
note to take with him recommending him tp their con- 
sideration, reminding them at the same time of their 
promises, and Barnabas, as often as he saw a servant, 
drew out the note and held it up, and even if he some- 
times may have presented it to someone who didn't 
know me, and even if those who did know me were 
irritated by his way of holding out the note in silence — 
for he didn't dare to speak up there — yet all the same 
it was a shame that nobody helped him, and it was a 
relief — which we could have secured, I must admit, by 
our own action and much earlier — when a servant who 
had probably been pestered several times already by 
the note, crushed it up and flung it into the wastepaper 
basket. Almost as if he had said : ‘ That's just what 
you yourselves do with letters,' it occurred to me. But 
barren of results as all this time was in other ways, it 
had a good effect on Barnabas, if one can call it a good 
thing that he grew prematurely old, became a man 
before his time, yes, even in some ways more grave and 
sensible than most men. Often it makes me sad to look 
at him and compare him with the boy that he was only^ 
two years ago. And with it all I'm quite without the 
comfort and support that, being a man, he could surely 
give me. Without me he could hardly have got into 
the Castle, but since he is there, he's independent of me. 
I'm his only intimate friend, but I'm certain that he 



THR CASTLE 


277 

only tells me a small part of what he has on his mind. 
He tells me a great many things about the Castle, but 
from his stones, from the trifling details that he gives, 
one can't understand in the least liow those things could 
have changed him so much. In particular I can't under- 
stand how the daring he had as a boy — it actually caused 
us anxiety — how he can have lost it so completely up 
there now that he's a man. Of course all that useless 
standing abput and waiting *all day, and day after day, 
and going on and on without any prospect of a change, 
must break a man down and make him unsure of himself 
and in the end actually incapable of anything else but 
this hopeless standing about. But why didn't he put 
up a fight even at the beginning ? Especially seeing 
that he soon recognised that I had been right and that 
there was no opportunity there for his ambition, though 
there might be some hope perhaps for the betterment 
of our family's condition. For up there, in spite of the 
servants' whims, everything goes on very soberly, ambi- 
tion seeks its sole satisfaction in work, and as in this way 
the work itself gains the ascendancy, ambition ceases 
to have any place at all, for childish desires there's no 
room up there. Nevertheless Barnabas fancied, so he 
has told me, that he could clearly see how great the 
power and knowledge even of those very questionable 
officials were into whose bureau he is allowed. How 
fast they dictated, with half-shut eyes and brief gestures, 
merely by raising a finger quelling the surly servants, 
affid making them smile with happiness even when they 
were checked ; or perhaps finding an important passage 
in one of the books and becoming quite absorbed in it, 
while the others would crowd round as near as the 
cramped space would allow them, and crane their necks 
to see it. These things and other things of the same kind 



THE CASTLE 


278 

gave Barnabas a great idea of those men, and he had 
die feeling that if he co|ild get the length of being noticed 
by them and could venture to address a few words to 
them, not as a stranger, but as a colleague — ^true a 
very subordinate colleague — in the bureau, incalculable 
things might be achieved for our family. But things 
have never got that length yet, and Barnabas can’t 
venture to do anything that might help towards it, 
although he’s well aware that, young as he js, he’s been 
raised to the difficult and responsible position of chief 
breadwinner in our family on account of this whole 
unfortunate affair. And now for the final confession ; 
it was a week after your arrival. I heard somebody 
mentioning it in the Herrenhof, but didn’t pay much 
attention ,* a Land Surveyor had come and I didn’t even 
know what a Land Surveyor was. But next evening 
Barnabas — at an agreed hour I usually set out to go a 
part of the way to meet him — came home earlier than 
usual, saw Amalia in the sitting-room, drew me out 
into the street, laid his head on my shoulder, and cried 
for several minutes. He was again the little boy he used 
to be. Something had happened to him that he hadn’t 
been prepared for. It was as if a whole new world had 
suddenly opened to him, and he could not bear the joy 
and the anxieties of all this newness. And yet the only 
thing that had happened was that he had been given 
a letter for delivery to you. But it was actually the first 
letter, the first commission, that he had ever been given.” 

Olga stopped. Everything was still except for thfe 
heavy, occasionally disturbed breathing of the old people. 
K. merely said casually, as if to round oflF Olga’s story : 
” You’ve all been playing with me. Barnabas brought 
me the letter with the air of an old and much occupied 
messenger, and you as well as Amalia — ^who for that 



THE CASTLE 


279 

time must have been in with you— behaved as if carrying 
messages and the letter itself wwe matters of indiflFer- 
encc." You must distinguish between us/* said Olga. 
“ Barnabas had been made a happy boy again by the 
letter, in spite of all the doubts that he had about his 
capability. He confined those doubts to himself and 
me, but he felt it a point of honour to look like a real 
messenger, as according to his ideas real messengers 
looked. So^although his hopes were now rising to an 
official uniform I had to alter his trousers, and in two 
hours, so that they would have some resemblance at 
least to the close-fitting trews of the official uniform, 
and he might appear in them before you, knowing, of 
course, that on this point you could be easily taken in. 
So much for Barnabas. But Amalia really despises 
his work as a messenger, and now that he seemed to 
have had a little success — as she could easily guess from 
Barnabas and myself and our talking and whispering 
together — she despised it more than ever. So she was 
speaking the truth, don't deceive yourself about that. 
But if I, K., have seemed to slight Barnabas's work, it 
hasn't been with any intention to deceive you, but from 
anxiety. These two letters that have gone through 
Barnabas’s hands are the first signs of grace, questionable 
as they are, that our family has received for three years. 
This change, if it is a change and not deception — decep- 
tions are more frequent than changes — is connected 
with your arrival here, our fate has become in a certain 
sense dependent on you, perhaps these two letters are 
only a beginning, and Barnabas's abilities will be used 
for other things than these two letters concerning vou — 
we must hope that as long as we can — for the time being, 
however, everything centres on you. Now up in the 
Castle we must rest content with whatever our lot 



z&o 


THE CASTLE 


happens to be, but down here we can, it may be, do 
something ourselves, tl^at is, make sure of your good-will, 
or at least save ourselves from your dislike, or, what's 
more important, protect you as far as our strength and 
experience go, so that your connection with the Castle— 
by which we might perhaps be helped too — might not 
be lost. Now what was our best way of bringing that 
about ? To prevent you from having any suspicion of 
us when we approached yo\i — for you're a stranger here 
and because of that certain to be full of suspicion, full of 
justifiable suspicion. And, besides, we're despised by 
everybody and you must be influenced by the general 
opinion, particularly through your fiancee, so how could 
we put ourselves forward without quite unintentionally 
setting ourselves up against your fiancee, and so offend- 
ing you ? And the messages, which I had read before 
you got them — Barnabas didn't read them, as a mes- 
senger he couldn't allow himself to do that — seemed at 
the first glance obsolete and not of much importance, 
yet took on the utmost importance in as much as they 
referred you to the Superintendent. Now in these cir- 
cumstances how were we to conduct ourselves towards 
you ? If we emphasised the letters' importance, we laid 
ourselves under suspicion by overestimating what was 
obviously unimportant, and in pluming ourselves as the 
vehicle of these messages we should be suspected of 
seeking our own ends, not yours ; more, in doing that 
wc might depreciate the value of the letter itself in your 
eyes and so disappoint you sore against our will. But 
if we didn't lay much stress on the letters we should lay 
ourselves equally under suspicion, for why in that case 
should we have taken the trouble of delivering such an 
unimportant letter, why should our actions and our 
words be in such clear contradiction, why should wc 



THE CASTLE 


281 

in this way disappoint not only you, the addressee, but 
also the sender of the letter, who <fertainly hadn't handed 
the letter to us so that we should belittle it to the addressee 
by our e^lanations ? And to hold the mean, without 
exaggeration on either side, in other words to estimate 
the just value of those letters, is impossible, they them- 
selves change in value perpetually, the reBections they 
give rise to are endless, and chance determines where 
one stops reflecting, and so tven our estimate of them 
is a matter of chance. And when on the top of that 
there came anxiety about you, everything became con- 
fused, and you mustn't judge whatever I said too 
severely. When, for example — as once happened — 
Barnabas arrived with the news that you were dis- 
satisfied with his work, and in his first distress — his pro- 
fessional vanity was wounded too I must admit — resolved 
to retire from the service altogether, then to make good 
the mistake I was certainly ready to deceive, to lie, to 
betray, to do anything, no matter how wicked, if it would 
only help. But even then I would have been doing it, 
at least in my opinion, as much for your sake as for ours." 

There was a knock. Olga ran to the door and un- 
fastened it. A strip of light from a dark lantern fell across 
the threshold. The late visitor put questions in a whisper 
and was answered in the same way, but was not satisfied 
and tried to force his way into the room. Olga found 
herself unable to hold him back any longer and called to 
Amalia, obviously hoping that to keep the old people from 
being disturbed in their sleep Amalia would do anything 
to eject the visitor. And indeed she hurried over at once, 
pushed Olga aside, and stepped into the street and closed 
the door behind her. She only remained there for a 
moment, almost at once she came back again, so quickly 
had she achieved what had proved impossible for Olga. 



282 


THE CASTLE 


K. then learned from Olga that the visit was intended 
for him. It had becup one of the assistants, who was 
looking for him at Frieda's command. Olga had 
wanted to shield K. from the assistant ; if K. should 
confess his visit here to Frieda later, he could, but it 
must not be discovered through the assistant ; K. 
agreed. But Olga's invitation to spend the night there 
and wait for Barnabas he declined, for himself he might 
perhaps have accepted fof it was already late in the 
night and it seemed to him that now, whether he 
wanted it or not, he was bound to this family in such 
a way that a bed for the night here, though for many 
reasons painful, nevertheless, when one considered this 
common bond, was the most suitable for him in the 
village ; all the same he declined it, the assistant's visit 
had alarmed him, it was incomprehensible to him how 
Frieda, who knew his wishes quite well, and the assist- 
ants, who had learned to fear him, had come together 
again like this, so that Frieda didn't scruple to send an 
assistant for him, only one of them, too, while the other 
had probably remained to keep her company. He 
asked Olga whether she had a whip, she hadn't one, 
but she had a good hazel switch, and he took it ; then 
he asked whether there was any other way out of the 
house, there was one through the yard, only one had 
to clamber over the wall of the neighbouring garden 
and walk through it before one reached the street. 
K. decided to do this. While Olga was conducting him 
through the yard, K. tried hastily to reassure her feaK, 
told her that he wasn't in the least angry at the smafl 
artifices she had told him about, but understood them 
very well, thanked her for the confidence she had shown 
in him in telling him her story, and asked her to send 
Barnabas to the school as soon as he arrived, even if 



THE CASTLE 


283 

it were during the night. It was true, the messages 
^vhich Barnabas brought were not^his only hope, other- 
wise things would be bad indeed with him, but he 
didn't by any means leave then\ out of account, he 
would hold to them and not forget Olga either, for 
still more important to him than the messages them- 
selves was Olga, her bravery, her prudence, if he had 
to choose between Olga and Amalia it wouldn't cost 
him much reflection. And he' pressed her hand cordially 
once more as he swung himself on to the wall of the 
neighbouring garden. 


XVI 

W HEN he reached the street he saw indistinctly 
in the darkness that a little farther along the 
assistant was still walking up and down before Barna- 
bas's house ; sometimes he stopped and tried to peep 
into the room through the drawn blinds. K. called 
to him ; without appearing visibly startled he gave up 
his spying on the house and came towards K. “ Who 
are you looking for ? " asked K., testing the suppleness 
of the hazel switch on his leg. You," replied the 
assistant as he came nearer. " But who are you ? " 
asked K. suddenly, for this did not appear to be the 
assistant. He seemed older, wearier, more wrinkled, 
fuller in the face, his walk too was quite different 
from the brisk walk of the assistants, which gave an 
impression as if their joints were charged with elec- 
tricity ; it was slow, a little halting, elegantly vale- 
tudinarian. "You don't recognise me ? " asked the 
nian, " Jeremiah, your old assistant." " I see," said K. 



THE CASTLE 


284 

tentatively producing the ha2scl switch again, which 
he had concealed b^ind his back. But you look 
quite different.'* “ It*s because I'm by myself,** said 
Jeremiah. “ When I^m by myself then all my youthful 
spirits are gone.** ** But where is Arthur? ** asked K. 

Arthur ? ** said Jeremiah. “ The little dear ? He has 
left the service. You were rather hard and rough on 
us, you know, and the gentle soul couldn't stand it. 
He's gone back to the cSstle to put in a complaint." 
" And you ? " asked K. " I'm able to stay here," said 
Jeremiah, " Arthur is putting in a complaint for me 
too." "What have you to complain about, then?" 
asked K. " That you can't understand a joke. What 
have we done ? Jested a little, laughed a little, teased 
your fiancee a little. And all according to our in- 
structions, too. When Gala ter sent us to you " 

"Galater?" asked K. "Yes, Galater," replied 
Jeremiah, " he was deputising for Klamm himself at 
the time. When he sent us to you he said — took a 
good note of it, for that's our business : You're to go 
down there as assistants to the Land Surveyor. We 
replied : But we don't know anything about the work. 
Thereupon he replied : That's not the main point : 
if it's necessary, he'll teach you it. The main thing is 
to cheer him up a little. According to the reports I've 
received he takes everything too seriously. He has just 
got to the village, and starts off thinking that a great 
experience, whereas in reality it's nothing at all. You 
must make him see that." " Well ? " said K., " was 
Galater right, and have you carried out your task?*" 
"That I don't know," replied Jeremiah. "In such a 
short time it was hardly possible. I only know that 
you were very rough on us, and that's what we're com- 
plaining of. I can't understand how you, an employee 



THE CASTLE 


285 

yourself and not even a Castle employee, aren’t able 
to see that a job like that is very%hard work, and that 
it's very wrong to make the work harder for the poor 
workers, and wantonly, almost chijdislily, as you have 
done. Your total lack of consideration in letting us 
freeze at the railings, and almost felling Arthur with 
your fist on the straw sack — Arthur, a man who feels 
a single cross word for days — and in chasing me up 
and down in the snow all afternoon, so that it was an 
hour before f could recover from it ! And I'm no 
longer young ! " My dear Jeremiah,” said K., 
” you're quite right about all this, only it's Galater 
you should complain to. He sent you here of his own 
accord, I didn't beg him to send you. And as I hadn't 
asked for you it was at my discretion to send you back 
again, and like you, I would much rather have done 
it peacefully than with violence, but evidently you 
wouldn't have it any other way. Besides, why didn't 
you speak to me when you came first as frankly as 
you've done just now ? " “ Because I was in the 
service," said Jeremiah, " surely that's obvious." 
" And now you're in the service no longer ? " asked K. 
" That's so," said Jeremiah, " Arthur has given notice 
in the Castle that we're giving up the job, or at least 
proceedings have been set going that will finally set us 
free from it." " But you’re still looking for me just as 
if you were in the service," said K. " No," replied 
Jeremiah, " I was only looking for you to reassure 
Friada. When you forsook her for Barnabas's sister 
she was very unhappy, not so much because of the loss, 
as because of your treachery, besides she had seen it 
coming for a long time and had suffered a great deal 
already on that account. I only went up to the school- 
window for one more look to see if you mightn t 



THE CASTLE 


286 

have become more reasonable. But you weren't there. 
Frieda was sitting hy herself on a bench crying. So 
then I went to her and we came to an agreement. 
Everything's settled. ^ I'm to be waiter in the Herrenhof^ 
at least until my business is settled in the Castle, and 
Frieda is back in the taproom again. It's better for 
Frieda. There was no sense in her becoming your wife. 
And you haven't known how to value the sacrifice that 
she was prepared to make* for you either. But the good 
soul had still some scruples left, perhaps ^he was doing 
you an injustice, she thought, perhaps, you weren't 
with the Barnabas girl after all. Although of course 
there could be no doubt where you were, I went all 
the same so as to make sure of it once and for all ; for , 
after all this worry Frieda deserved to sleep peacefully 
for once, not to mention myself. So I went and not 
only found you there, but was able to see incidentally ' 
as well that you had the girls on a string. The black 
one especially — a real wild-cat — she's set her cap at 
you. Well, every one to his taste. But all the same it 
wasn't necessary for you to take the roundabout way 
through the next-door garden, I know that way." 

So now the thing had come after all which he had i 
been able to foresee, but not to prevent. Frieda had 
left him. It could not be final, it was not so bad as 
that, Frieda could be won back, it was easy for any 
stranger to influence her, even for those assistants who 
considered Frieda's position much the same as their 
own, and now that they had given notice had prompted 
Frieda to do the same, but K. would only have to show 
himself and remind her of all that spoke in his favour, 
and she would rue it and come back to him, especially 
if he should be in a position to justify his visit to those 
girls by some success due entirely to them. Yet in J 



THE CASTLE 


287 


spite of those reflections, by which he sought to reassure 
himself on Frieda’s account, ha was not reassured. 
Only a few minutes ago he had been praising Frieda 
up to Olga and calling her his only support ; well, that 
support was not of the firmest, no intervention of the 
^ mighty ones had been needed to rob K. of Frieda — 
even this not very savoury assistant had been enough 

this puppet which sometimes gave one the impression 

of not being properly alive. * 

Jeremiah hid already begun to disappear. K. called 
him back. " Jeremiah,” he said, ” I want to be quite 
frank with you ; answer one question of mine too in 
the same spirit. Were no longer in the position of 
master and servant, a matter of congratulation not only 
to you but to me too ; we have no grounds, then, for 
deceiving each other. Here before your eyes I snap 
this switch which was intended for you, for it wasn’t 
for fear of you that I chose the back way out, but so as 
to surprise you and lay it across your shoulders a few 
times. But don’t take it badly, all that is over ; if you 
hadn't been forced on me as a servant by the bureau, 
but had been simply an acquaintance, we would 
certainly have got on splendidly, even if your appear- 
ance might have disturbed me occasionally. And we 
can make up now for what we have missed in that way. 

” Do you think so ? ” asked the assistant, yawning and 
closing his eyes wearily. ” I could of course explain 
the matter more at length, but I have no time, I must 
go wto Frieda, the poor child is waiting for me, she 
hasn't started on her job yet, at my request the landlord 
has given her a few hours’ grace — she wanted to fling 
herself into the work at once probably to help her to 
forget — and we want to spend that little time at least 
together. As for your proposal, I have no cause. 



THE CASTLE 


288 

certainly, to deceive you, but I have just as little to 
confide anything to you. My case, in other words, is 
different from yours. So long as my relation to you 
was that of a servant, you were naturally a very import- 
ant person in my eyes, not because of your own qualities, 
but because of my oflSce, and I would have done any- 
thing for you that you wanted, but now you're of no 
importance to me. Even your breaking the switch 
doesn't affect me, it only reminds me what a rough 
master I had, it's not calculated to prejudice me in 
your favour." " You talk to me," said K., " as if it 
were quite certain that you'll never have to fear any- 
thing from me again. But that isn't really so. From 
all appearances you're not free from me, things aren't 

settled here so quickly as that " " Sometimes even 

more quickly," Jeremiah threw in. " Sometimes," 
said K., " but nothing points to the fact that it's so 
this time, at least neither you nor I have anything that 
we can show in black and white. The proceedings 
are only started, it seems, and I haven't used my in- 
fluence yet to intervene, but I will. If the affair turns 
out badly for you, you'll find that you haven't exactly 
endeared yourself to your master, and perhaps it was 
superfluous after all to break the hazel switch. And 
then you have abducted Frieda, and that has given you 
an inflated notion of yourself, but with all the respect 
that I have for your person, even if you have none for 
me any longer, a few words from me to Frieda will be 
enough — I know it — to smash up the lies that you've 
caught her with. And only lies could have estranged 
Frieda from me." " These threats don't fiighten me," 
replied Jeremiah, " you don't in the least want me as 
an assistant, you were afraid of me even as an assistant, 
you're afraid of assistants in any case, it was only fear 



THE CASTLE 


289 

that made you strike poor Arthur." " Perhaps," said 
K., but did it hurt the less far that? Perhaps Til 
be able to show my fear of you in that way many times 
yet. Once I sec that you haven't much joy in an 
assistant's work, it'll give me great satisfaction again, 
in spite of all my fear, to keep you at it. And more- 
over I'll do my best next time to see that you come by 
yourself, without Arthur, I'll be able then to devote 
more attention to you." ^ Do you think," asked 
Jeremiah, " that I have even the slightest fear of all 
this ? " "I do think so," said K., " you're a little 
afraid, that's certain, and if you're wise, very much 
afraid. If that isn't so why didn't you go straight back 
to Frieda ? Tell me, are you in love with her, tlien ? " 
" In love 1 " said Jeremiah. " She's a nice clever girl, 
a former sweetheart of Klamm's, so respectable in any 
case. And as she kept on imploring me to save her 
from you why shouldn't I do her the favour, particu- 
larly as I wasn't doing you any harm, seeing that you've 
consoled yourself with these damned Barnabas girls ? " 
" Now I can see how frightened you are," said K., 
" frightened out of your wits ; you're trying to catch 
me with lies. All that Frieda asked for was to be 
saved from those filthy swine of assistants, who were 
getting past bounds, but unfortunately I hadn't time 
to fulfil her wish completely, and now this is the result 
of itiy negligence." 

" Land Surveyor, Land Surveyor ! " someone shouted 
down the street. It was Barnabas. He came up breath- 
less with running, but did not forget to greet K. with 
a bow. " It's done I " he said. " What's done ? " 
asked K. " You've laid my request before Klamm ? " 
" That didn't come oflF," said Barnabas, " I did my 
best, but it was impossible, I was urgent, stood there 
10 



THE CASTLE 


290 

all day without being asked and so close to the desk that 
once a clerk actually pushed me away, for I was standing 
in his light, I reported myself when Klamm looked up 
— and that's forbidden — by lifting my hand, I was the 
last in the bureau, was left alone there with only the 
servants, but had the luck all the same to see Klamm 
coming back again, but it was not on my account, he 
only wanted to have another hasty glance at something 
in a book and went away immediately ; finally, as I 
still made no move, the servants almost swept me out 
of the door with the broom. I tell you all this so that 
you need never complain of my efforts again." " What 
good is all your zeal to me, Barnabas," said K., " when 
it hasn't the slightest success ? " " But I have had 

success ! " replied Barnabas. "As I was leaving my 
bureau — I call it my bureau — saw a gentleman coming 
slowly towards me along one of the passages, which 
were quite empty except for him. By that time in fact 
it was very late. I decided to wait for him. It was a 
good pretext to wait longer, indeed I would much rather 
have waited in any case, so as not to have to bring you 
news of failure. But apart from that it was worth while 
waiting, for it was Erlanger. You don't know him ? 
He's one of Klamm's chief secretaries. A weakly little 
gentleman, he limps a little. He recognised me at once, 
he's famous for his splendid memory and his knowledge 
of people, he just draws his brows together and that's 
enough for him to recognise anybody, often people 
even that he’s never seen before, that he's only heand of 
or read about ; for instance, he could hardly ever have 
seen me. But although he recognises everybody immedi- 
ately, he always asks first as if he weren't quite sure. 
Aren't you Barnabas ? he asked me. And then he went 
on : You know the Land Surveyor, don't you ? And 



THE CASTLE 


291 

then he said : That’s very lucky. Tm just going to the 
Herrenhof. The Land Surveyor is»to report to me there. 
I'll be in room Number 15. But he must come at once. 
I've only a few things to settle tl^re and I leave again 
for the Castle at 5 o'clock in the morning. Tell him 
that it's very important that I should speak to him." 

Suddenly Jeremiah set off at a run. In his excitement 
Barnabas had scarcely noticed his presence till now and 
asked : " Where's Jeremiah going ? " "To forestall 

me with Erlanger," said K., and set off after Jeremiah, 
caught him up, hung on to his arm, and said : “Is it 
a sudden desire for Frieda that's seized you ? I've got 
it as well, so we'll go together side by side." 


XVII 

B efore the dark Herrenhof a little group of men 
were standing, two or three had lanterns with 
them, so that a face here and there could be distinguished. 
K. recognised only one acquaintance, Gerstacker the 
carrier. Gerstacker greeted him with the enquiry : 
“You're still in the village?" “Yes," replied K. 
“I've come here for good." “ That doesn't matter to 
me," said Gerstacker, breaking out into a fit of coughing 
and turning away to the others. 

It turned out that they were all waiting for Erlanger. 
Ei;lflnger had already arrived, but he was consulting 
first with Momus before he admitted his clients. They 
were all complaining at not being allowed to wait inside 
and having to stand out there in the snow. The weather 
wasn't very cold, but still it showed a lack of considera- 
tion to keep them standing there in front of the house 



THE CASTLE 


292 

in the darkness, perhaps for hours. It was certainly not 
the fault of Erlanger, who was always very accom- 
modating, knew nothing about it, and would certainly 
be very annoyed if it were reported to him. It 
was the fault of the Herrenhof landlady, who in her 
positively morbid determination to be refined, wouldn't 
suffer a lot of people to come into the Herrenhof at the 
same time. “If it absolutely must be and they must 
come," she used to say, “ then in Heaven's name let 
them come one at a time.'' And she had managed to 
arrange that the clients, who at first had waited simply 
in a passage, later on the stairs, then in the hall, and 
finally in the taproom, were at last pushed out into the 
street. But even that had not satisfied her. It was 
unendurable for her to be always “ besieged '', as she 
expressed herself, in her own house. It was incompre- 
hensible to her why there should need to be clients 
waiting at all. “ To dirty the front-door steps," an 
official had once told her, obviously in annoyance, but 
to her this pronouncement had seemed very illuminat- 
ing, and she was never tired of quoting it. She tried 
her best — and she had the approval in this case of the 
clients too — to get a building set up opposite the Her- 
renhof where the clients could wait. She would have 
liked best of all if the interviews and examinations could 
have taken place outside the Herrenhof altogether, but 
the officials opposed that, and when the officials opposed 
her seriously the landlady naturally enough was unable 
to gainsay diem, though in lesser matters she exercised 
a kind of petty tyranny, thanks to her indefatigable, yet 
femininely insinuating zeal. And the landlady would 
probably have to endure those interviews and examina- 
tions in the Herrenhof in perpetuity, for the gendemen 
from the Castle refused to budge from the place whenever 



THE CASTLE 


293 

they had official business in the village. They were 
always in a hurry, they came to the village much against 
their will, they had not the slightest intention of pro- 
longing their stay beyond the time, absolutely necessary, 
and so they could not be asked, simply for the sake of 
making things more pleasant in the Herrenhof, to waste 
time by transferring themselves with all their papers 
to some other house. The officials preferred indeed 
to get through their business in the taproom or in their 
rooms, if possible while they were at their food, or in bed 
before retiring for the night, or in the morning when 
they were too weary to get up and wanted to stretch 
themselves for a little longer. Yet the question of the 
erection of a waiting-room outside seemed to be nearing 
a favourable solution ; but it was really a sharp blow for 
the landlady — people laughed a little over it — that this 
matter of a waiting-room should itself make innumerable 
interviews necessary, so that the lobbies of the house were 
hardly ever empty. 

The waiting group passed the time by talking in half- 
whispers about those things. K. was struck by the fact 
that, though their discontent was general, nobody saw 
any objection to Erlanger's summoning his clients in the 
middle of the night. He asked why this was so and 
got the answer that they should be only too thankful 
to Erlanger. It was only his goodwill and his high 
conception of his office that induced him to come to 
the village at all, he could easily if he wished — and it 
would probably be more in accordance with the regula- 
tions too — he could easily send an under-secretary and 
let him draw up statements. Still, he usually refused 
to do this, he wanted to see and hear everything for 
himself, but for this purpose he had to sacrifice his 
nights, for in his official time-table there was no time 



THE CASTLE 


294 

allowed for journeys to the village. K. objected that 
even Klamm came to the village during the day and 
even stayed for several days ; was Erlanger, then, a mere 
secretary, more indispensable up there ? One or two 
laughed good humouredly, others maintained an em- 
barrassed silence, the latter gained the ascendancy, and 
K. received hardly any reply. Only one man replied 
hesitatingly, that of course Klamm was indispensable, 
in the Castle as in the village. 

Then the front door opened and Momus appeared 
between two attendants carrying lamps. The first 
who will be admitted to Herr Erlanger,'* he said, " are 
Gerstacker and K. Are these two men here ? " They 
reported themselves, but before they could step forward 
Jeremiah slipped in with a I'm a waiter here," and, 
greeted by Momus with a smiling slap on the shoulder, 
disappeared inside. " I'll have to keep a sharper eye 
on Jeremiah," K. told himself, though he was quite 
aware at the same time that Jeremiah was probably 
far less dangerous than Arthur who was working against 
him in the Castle. Perhaps it would actually have been 
wiser to let himself be annoyed by them as assistants, 
than to have them prowling about without supervision 
and allow them to carry on their intrigues in freedom, 
intrigues for which they seemed to have special facilities. 

As K. was passing Momus the latter started as if only 
now did he recognise in him the Land Surveyor. " Ah, 
the Land Surveyor ? " he said. " The man who was so 
unwilling to be examined and now is in a hurry to be 
examined. It would have been simpler to let me do it 
that time. Well, really it's difficult to choose the right 
time for a hearing." Since at these words K. made to 
stop, Momus went on : "Go in, go in ! I needed your 
answers then, I don't now." Nevertheless K. replied, 



THE CASTLE 


295 

provoked by Momus's tone : You only think of your- 
selves. I would never and will 'never answer merely 
because of someone's office, neither then nor now/' 
Momus replied : '‘Of whom, th^, should we think ? 
Who else is there here 1 Look for yourself ! " 

In the hall they were met by an attendant who led 
them the old way, already known to K., across the court- 
yard, then into ihe entry and through the low, somewhat 
downward sloping passage. *rhe upper storeys were 
evidently reserved only for higher officials, the secre- 
taries, on the other hand, had their rooms in this passage, 
even Erlanger himself, although he was one of the highest 
among them. The servant put out his lantern, for here 
it was brilliant with electric light. Everything was on 
a small scale, but elegantly finished. The space wav 
utilised to the best advantage. The passage was just 
high enough for one to walk without bending one's head. 
Along both sides the doors almost touched each other. 
The walls did not quite reach to the ceiling, probably 
for reasons of ventilation, for here in the low cclIar-Iikc 
passage the tiny rooms could hardly have windows. 
The disadvantage of those incomplete walls was that 
the passage, and necessarily the rooms as well, were 
noisy. Many of the rooms seemed to be occupied, in 
most the people were still awake, one could hear voices, 
hammering, the clink of glasses. But the impression 
was not one of particular gaiety. The voices were 
muffled, only a word here and there could be indistinctly 
made out, it did not seem to be conversation either, 
probably someone was only dictating something ot 
reading something aloud ; and precisely from the rooms 
where there was a clinking of glasses and plates no word 
was to be heard, and the hammering reminded K. that 
he had been told some time or other that certain of 



THE CASTLE 


296 

the officials occupied themselves occasionally with car- 
pentry, model engines, and so forth, to recuperate from 
the continual strain of mental work. The passage itself 
was empty except for a pallid, tall, thin gentleman in 
a fur coat, under which his night clothes could be seen, 
who was sitting before one of the doors. Probably it 
had become too stuffy for him in the room, so he had 
sat down outside and was reading a newspaper, but not 
very carefully ; often he yawned and left off reading, 
then bent forward and glanced along the passage, per- 
haps he was waiting for a client whom he had invited 
and who had omitted to come. When they had passed 
him the servant said to Gerstacker : ** That’s Pinz- 

gauer.” Gerstacker nodded : ** He hasn’t been down 
here for a long time now,” he said. ” Not for a long 
time now,” the servant agreed. 

At last they stopped before a door which was not in 
any way different from the others, and yet behind which, 
so the servant informed them, was Erlanger. The servant 
got K. to lift him on to his shoulders and had a look 
into the room through the open slit. ” He’s lying 
down,” said the servant climbing down, ” on the bed, 
in his clothes, it’s true, but I fancy all the same that he’s 
asleep. Often he’s overcome with weariness like that, 
here in the village, what with the change in his habits. 
We’ll have to wait. When he wakes up he’ll ring. 
Besides, it has happened before this for him to sleep 
away all his stay in the village, and then when he woke 
to have to leave again immediately for the Castle. *It’s 
voluntary, of course, the work he does here.” ” Then 
it would be better if he just slept on,” said Gerstacker, 
” for when he has a little time left for his work after he 
wakes, he’s very vexed at having fallen asleep, and tries 
to get everything settled in a hurry, so that one can 



THE CASTLE 


297 

hardly get a word in." " You’ve come on account of 
the contract for the carting for* the new building ? " 
asked the servant. Gerstacker nodded, drew the servant 
aside and talked to him in a low, voice, but the servant 
hardly listened, gazed away over Gerstacker, whom 
he overtopped by more than a head, and stroked his 
hair slowly and seriously. 


xvin 

T hen, as he was looking round aimlessly, K. saw 
Frieda far away at a turn of the passage ; she 
behaved as if she did not recognise him and only stared 
at him expressionlessly ; she was carr)ang a tray with 
some empty dishes in her hand. He said to the servant, 
who, however, paid no attention whatever to him — the 
more one talked to the servant the more absent-minded 
he seemed to become — that he would be back in a 
moment, and ran off to Frieda. Reaching her he took 
her by the shoulders as if he were seizing his own pro- 
perty again, and asked her a few unimportant questions 
with his eyes holding hers. But her rigid bearing hardly 
as much as softened, to hide her confusion she tried to 
rearrange the dishes on the tray and said : “ What do 
you want from me ? Go back to the others — oh, you 
know whom I mean, you’ve just come from them, I 
c^ see it." K. changed his tactics immediately ; the 
explanation mustn’t come so suddenly, and mustn’t 
begin with the worst point, the point most unfavourable 
to himself. " I thought you were in the taproom,*’ he 
said. Frieda looked at him in amazement and then 
softly passed her free hand over his brow and cheeks. It 



THE CASTLE 


298 

was as if she had forgotten what he looked like and were 
trying to recall it to mind again, even her eyes had the 
veiled look of one who was painfully trying to remember. 
‘‘ Tve been taken on^in the taproom again,'* she said 
slowly at last, as if it did not matter what she said, but 
as if beneath her words she were carrying on another 
conversation with K. which was more important — ‘‘ this 
work here is not for me, anybody at all could do it ; 
anybody who can make beds and look ^ood-natured 
and doesn't mind the advances of the boarders, but 
actually likes them ; anybody who can do that can be 
a chamber-maid. But in the taproom, that's quite 
different. I've been taken on straight away for the 
taproom again, in spite of that fact that I didn't leave 
it with any great distinction, but, of course, I had a 
word put in for me. But the landlord was delighted 
that I had a word put in for me to make it easy for him 
to take me on again. It actually ended by them having 
to press me to take on the post ; when you reflect what 
the taproom reminds me of you'll understand that. 
Finally I decided to take it on. I'm only here tem- 
porarily. Pepi begged us not to put her to the shame of 
having to leave the taproom at once, and seeing that 
she has been willing and has done everything to the best 
of her ability, we have given her a twenty-four hours' 
extension." " That's all very nicely arranged," said 
K., " but once you left the taproom for my sake, and 
now that we're soon to be married are you going back 
to it again ? " " There will be no marriage," said 

Frieda. " Because I’ve been unfaithful to you ? " asked 
R. Frieda nodded. " Now, look here, Frieda," said 
R., "we’ve often talked already about this alleged 
unfaithfulness of mine, and every time you've had 
to recognise finally that your suspicions were unjust. 



THE CASTLE 


299 

And since then nothing has changed on my side, all 
Tve done has remained as innocent as it was at first and 
as it must always remain. So something must have 
changed on your side, through the .•suggestions of strangers 
or in some way or other. You do me an injustice in any 
case, for just listen to how I stand with those two girls. 
The one, the dark one — Vm almost ashamed to defend 
myself on particular points like this, but you give me 
no choice — the dark one, then, is probably just as dis- 
pleasing to me as to you ; I keep my distance with her 
in every way I can, and she makes it easy, too, no one 
could be more retiring than she is/' Yes," cried 
Frieda, the words slipped out as if against her will, K. 
was delighted to see her attention diverted, she was 
not saying what she had intended — " Yes, you may look 
upon her as retiring, you tell me that the most shameless 
creature of them all is retiring, and incredible as it is, 
you mean it honestly, you're not shamming, I know. 
The Bridge Inn landlady once said of you : * I can’t 
abide him, but I can't let him alone either, one simply 
can't control oneself when one sees a child that can 
hardly walk trying to go too far for it, one simply has 
to interfere.' " " Pay attention to her advice for this 

once," said K. smiling, " but that girl — whether she's 
retiring or shameless doesn't matter — I don't want to 
hear any more about her." " But why do you call 
her retiring ? " asked Frieda obdurately — K. considered 
this interest of hers a favourable sign — " have you found 
hef so, or are you simply casting a reflection on some- 
body else?" "Neither the one nor the other," said 
K., " I call her that out of gratitude, because she makes 
it easy for me to ignore her, and because if she said even 
a word or two to me I couldn't bring myself to go back 
again, which would be a great loss to me, for I must go 



THE CASTLE 


JOO 

there for the sake of both our futures, as you know. And 
it's simply for that reason that I have to talk with the 
other girl, whom I respect, I must admit, for her cap- 
ability, prudence, anc| unselfishness, but whom nobody 
could say was seductive." " The servants are of a 
diflFerent opinion," said Frieda. ** On that as on lots of 
other subjects," said K. " Are you going to deduce my 
unfaithfulness from the tastes of the servants ? " Frieda 
remained silent and suffered K. to take the tray from 
her, set it on the floor, put his arm through hers, and 
walk her slowly up and down in the corner of the passage. 
" You don't know what fidelity is," she said, his nearness 
putting her a little on the defensive, what your rela- 
tions with the girl may be isn't the most important 
point ; the fact that you go to that house at all and 
come back with the smell of their kitchen on your clothes 
is itself an unendurable humiliation for me. And then 
you rush out of the school without saying a word. And 
stay with them, too, the half of the night. And when 
you're asked for, you let those girls deny that you're 
there, deny it passionately, especially the wonderfully 
retiring one. And creep out of the house by a secret 
way, perhaps actually to save the good name of the 
girls, the good name of those girls. No, don't let us talk 
about it any more." " Yes, don't let us talk of this," 
said K., " but of something else, Frieda. Besides, there's 
nothing more to be said about it. You know why I have 
to go there. It isn't easy for me, but I overcome my 
feelings. You shouldn't make it any harder for me than 
it is. To-night I only thought of dropping in there for 
a minute to see whether Barnabas had come at last, for 
he had an important message which he should have 
brought long before. He hadn’t come, but he was bound 
to come very soon, so I was assured, and it seemed ver)' 



THE CASTLE 


301 

probable too. I didn't want to let him come after me. 
for you to be insulted by his presence. The hours passed 
and unfortunately he didn't come. But another came 
all right, a man whom I hate. J had no intention of 
letting myself be spied on by him, so I left through the 
neighbour's garden, but I didn't want to hide from him 
either, and I went up to him frankly when I reached 
the street, with a very good^ and supple hazel switch, 
I admit. That is all, so there's nothing more to be said 
about it ; 6ut there's plenty to say about something 
else. What about the assistants, the very mention of 
whose name is as repulsive to me as that family is to 
you ? Compare your relations with them with my 
relations with that family. I understand your antipathy 
to Barnabas's family and I can share it. It's only for the 
sake of my affairs that I go to see them, sometimes it 
almost seems to me that I'm abusing and exploiting 
them. But you and the assistants ! You've never denied 
that they persecute you, and you've admitted that you're 
attracted by them. I wasn't angry with you for that, 
I recognised that powers were at work which you 
weren't equal to, I was glad enough to see that you put 
up a resistance at least, I helped to defend you, and just 
because I left off for a few hours, trusting in your con- 
stancy, trusting also, I must admit, in the hope that 
tlie house was securely locked and the assistants finally 
put to flight — ^I still underestimate them. I'm afraid — 
just because I left off for a few hours and this Jeremiah 
— <who is, when you look at him closely, a rather un- 
healthy elderly creature — had the impudence to go up 
to the window ; just for this, Frieda, I must lose you 
and get for a greeting : ' There will be no marriage. 
Shouldn't I be the one to cast reproaches ? But I don t, 
I have never done so." And once more it seemed advis- 



THE CASTLE 


302 

able to K. to distract Frieda's mind a little, and he 
begged her to bring him something to eat for he had 
had nothing since midday. Obviously relieved by the 
request, Frieda noddfd and ran to fetch something, 
not farther along the passage, however, where K. con- 
jectured the kitchen was, but down a few steps to the 
left. In a little she brought a plate with slices of meat 
and a bottle of wine, but they were clearly only the remains 
of a meal, the scraps of meat had been hastily ranged 
out anew so as to hide the fact, yet whole sausage skins 
had been overlooked, and the bottle was three-quarters 
empty. However, K. said nothing and fell on the food 
with a good appetite. ‘‘You were in the kitchen ? " 
he asked. “ No, in my own room," she said. “ I have 
a room down there." ‘‘You might surely have taken 
me with you," said K. ‘‘ I'll go down now, so as to sit 
down for a little while I'm eating." " I'll bring you 
a chair," said Frieda already making to go. ‘‘ Thanks," 
replied K. holding her back, ‘‘ I'm neither going down 
there, nor do I need a chair any longer." Frieda endured 
his hand on her arm defiantly, bowed her head and bit 
her lip. ‘‘ Well, then, he is down there," she said, ‘‘ did 
you expect anything else ? He's lying on my bed, he 
got a cold out there, he's shivering, he's hardly had any 
food. At bottom it's all your fault, if you hadn't driven 
the assistants away and run after those people, we might 
be sitting comfortably in the school now. You alone 
have destroyed our happiness. Do you think that 
Jeremiah, so long as he was in service, would have dased 
to take me away ? Then you entirely misunderstood 
the way things are ordered here. He wanted me, he 
tormented himself, he lay in watch for me, but that 
was only a game, like the play of a hungry dog who 
nevertheless wouldn't dare to leap up on the table. 



THE CASTLE 


And just the same with me. 1 was drawn to him, he 
was a playmate of mine in my childhood — we played 
together on the slope of the Castle Hill, a lovely time, 
you’ve never asked me anything about my past — but 
all that wasn’t decisive as long as Jeremi^ was held 
back by his service, for I knew my duty as your future 
wife. But then you drove the assistants away and 
plumed yourself on it besides, as if you had done some- 
thing for me by it ; well, in*a certain sense it was true. 
Your plan Ras succeeded as far as Arthur is concerned, 
but only for the moment, he’s delicate, he hasn’t 
Jeremiah’s passion that nothing can daunt, besides you 
almost shattered his health for him by the buffet you 
gave him that night — it was a blow at my happiness 
as well — he fled to the Castle to complain, and even 
if he comes back soon, he’s gone now all the same. But 
Jeremiah stayed. When he’s in service he fears the 
slightest look of his master, but when he’s not in service 
there’s nothing he’s afraid of. He came and took me ; 
forsaken by you, commanded by him, my old friend, 
I couldn’t resist. I didn’t unlock the school door. He 
smashed the window and lifted me out. We flew here, 
the landlord looks up to him, nothing could be more 
welcome to the guests, either, than to have such a waiter, 
so we were taken on, he isn’t living with me, but we are 
staying in the same room.” ” In spite of everything,” 
said K., ” I don’t regret having driven the assistants 
from our service. If things stood as you say, and your 
futhfulness was only determined by the assistants being 
fn the position of servants, then it was a good thing that 
it came to an end. The happiness of a married life spent 
with two beasts of prey, who could only be kept under 
by the whip, wouldn’t have been very great. In that 
case I’m even thankful to this family who have uninten- 



THE CASTLE 


304 

tionally had some part in separating us.*' They became 
silent and began to walk backwards and forwards again 
side by side, though neither this time could have told 
who had made the first move. Close beside him, Frieda 
seemed annoyed that K. did not take her arm again. 
“ And so everything seems in order," K. went on, ‘^and 
we might as well say good-bye, and you go to your 
Jeremiah, who must have had this chill, it seems, ever 
since I chased him through' the garden, and whom you've 
already left by himself too long in that case, ‘and I to the 
empty school, or, seeing that there's no place for me 
there without you, anywhere else where they'll take me 
in. If I hesitate still in spite of this, it's because I have 
still a little doubt about what you've told me, and with 
good reason. I have a different impression of Jeremiah. 
So long as he was in service he was always at your heels 
and I don't believe that his position would have held 
him back permanently from making a serious attempt 
on you. But now that he considers that he's absolved 
from service, it's a different case. Forgive me if I have 
to explain myself in this way : Since you're no longer 
his master's fiancee, you're by no means such a tempta- 
tion for him as you used to be. You may be the friend 
of his childhood, but — I only got to know him really 
from a short talk to-night — in my opinion he doesn't 
lay much weight on such sentimental considerations. 
I don't know why he should seem a passionate person 
in your eyes. His mind seems to me on the contrary to 
be particularly cold. He received from Galater certain 
instructions relating to me, instructions probably ndt 
very much in my favour, he exerted himself to carry 
them out, with a certain passion for service. I'll admit — 
it's not so uncommon here — one of them was that he 
should wreck our relationship ; probably he tried to 



THE CASTLE 


505 

do it by several means, one of them was to tempt you 
by his evil languishing glances, another— here the land- 
lady supported him— was to invent fables about my 
unfaithfulness ; his attempt succeeded, some memory 
or other of Klamm that clung to Rim may have helped, 
he has lost his position, it is true, but probably just at 
the moment when he no longer needed it, then he reaped 
the fruit of his labours and lifted you out through the 
school window, with that his \ask was finished, and his 
passion for Service having left him now, he'll feel bored, 
he would rather be in Arthur's shoes, who isn't really 
complaining up there at all, but earning praise and new 
commissions, but someone had to stay behind to follow 
the further developments of the affair. It's rather a 
burdensome task to him to have to look after you. Of 
love for you he hasn't a trace, he frankly admitted it to 
me ; as one of Klamm 's sweethearts he of course respects 
you, and to insinuate himself into your bedroom and 
feel himself for once a little Klamm certainly gives him 
pleasure, but that is all, you yourself mean nothing to 
him now, his finding a place for you here is only a 
supplementary part of his main job ; so as not to dis- 
quieten you he has remained here himself too, but only 
for the time being, as long as he doesn't get further news 
from the Castle and his cooling feelings towards you 
aren't quite cured." " How you slander him ! " said 
Frieda, striking her little fists together. " Slander ? " 
said K., " no, I don't wish to slander him. But I may 
quite well perhaps be doing him an injustice, that is 
certainly possible. What I've said about him doesn't 
lie on the surface for anybody to see, and it may be 
looked at differently too. But slander ? Slander could 
only have one object, to combat your love for him. If 
ihat were necessary and if slander were the most fitting 



THE CASTLE 


306 

means, I wouldn't hesitate to slander him. Nobody 
could condemn me for it, his position puts him at such 
an advantage as compared with me that, thrown back 
solely on my own resources, I could even allow myself 
a little slander. It would be a comparatively innocent, 
but in the last resort a powerless, means of defence. So 
put down your fists." And K. took Frieda^s hand in 
his ; Frieda tried to draw it away, but smilingly and 
not with any great earnestness. " But I don't need 
slander," said K., " for you don't love htoi, you only 
think you do, and you'll be thankful to me for ridding 
you of your illusion. For think, if anybody wanted to take 
you away from me, without violence, but with the most 
careful calculation, he could only do it through the two 
assistants. In appearance good, childish, merry, irre- 
sponsible youths, fallen from the sky, from the Castle, 
a dash of childhood's memories with them too ; all that 
of course must have seemed very nice, especially when 
I was the antithesis of it all, and was always running 
after affairs moreover which were scarcely compre- 
hensible, which were exasperating to you, and which 
threw me together with people whom you considered 
deserving of your hate — something of which you carried 
over to me too, in spite of all my innocence. The whole 
thing was simply a wicked but very clever exploitation 
of the failings in our relationship. Everybody's relations 
have their blemishes, even ours, we came together from 
two very different worlds, and since we have known 
each other the life of each of us has had to be quite 
different, we still feel insecure, it's all too new. I don't 
speak of myself, I don't matter so much, in reality I’ve 
been enriched from the very first moment that you 
looked on me, and to accustom oneself to one’s riches 
isn't very difficult. But — not to speak of anything else 



THE CASTLE 


307 

—you were torn away from Klamm, I can't calculate 
how much that must have meant, but a vague idea of 
it Ive managed to arrive at gradually, you stumbled, 
you couldn't find yourself, and ^ven if I was always 
ready to help you, still I wasn't always there, and when 
I was there you were held captive by your dreams or 
by something more palpable, the landlady, say— in short 
there were times when you^ turned away from me, 
longed, poor^ child, for vague inexpressible things, and 
at those periods any passable man had only to come 
within your range of vision and you lost yourself to him. 
succumbing to the illusion that mere fancies of the 
moment, ghosts, old memories, things of the past and 
things receding ever more into the past, life that had 
once been lived — that all this was your actual present- 
day life. A mistake, Frieda, nothing more than the 
last and, properly regarded, contemptible difficulties 
attendant on our final reconciliation. Come to yourself, 
gather yourself together ; even if you thought that the 
assistants were sent by Klamm — it's quite untrue, they 
come from Galater — and even if they did manage by 
the help of this illusion to charm you so completely that 
even in their disreputable tricks and their lewdness you 
thought you found traces of Klamm, just as one fancies 
one catches a glimpse of some precious stone that one 
has lost in a dung-heap, while in reality one wouldn't 
be able to find it even if it were there — all the same 
they're only hobbledehoys like the servants in the stall, 
except that they're not healthy like them, and a little 
fresh air makes them ill and compels them to take to 
their beds, which I must say that they know how to 
snuffle out with a servant's true cunning." Frieda had 
let her head fall on K.'s shoulder ; their arms round 
each other, they walked silently up and down. If 



THE CASTLE 


308 

we had only," said Frieda after a while, slowly, quietly, 
almost serenely, as if she knew that only a quite short 
respite of peace on K/s shoulder were reserved for her, 
and she wanted to enjoy it to the utmost, " if we had 
only gone away somewhere at once that night, we might 
be in peace now, always together, your hand always near 
enough for mine to grasp ; oh, how much I ne^ your 
companionship, how lost J have felt without it ever since 
Tve known you, to have your company,^ believe me, 
is the only dream that I've had, that and nothing else." 

Then someone called from the side passage, it was 
Jeremiah, he was standing there on the lowest step, he 
was in his shirt, but had thrown a wrap of Frieda's 
round him. As he stood there, his hair rumpled, his 
thin beard lank as if dripping with wet, his eyes pain- 
fully beseeching and wide with reproach, his sallow 
cheeks flushed, but yet flaccid, his naked legs trembling 
so violently with cold that the long fringes of the wrap 
quivered as well, he was like a patient who had escaped 
from hospital, and whose appearance could only suggest 
one thought, that of getting him back in bed again. 
This in fact was the effect that he had on Frieda, she 
disengaged herself from K., and was down beside Jere- 
miah in a second. Her nearness, the solicitude with 
which she drew the wrap closer round him, the haste 
with which she tried to force him back into the room, 
seemed to give him new strength, it was as if he only 
recognised K. now. " Ah, the Land Surveyor ! " he 
said, stroking Frieda's cheek to propitiate her, for^jhe 
did not want to let him talk any further, " forgive the 
interruption. But I'm not at all well, that must be my 
excuse. I think I'm feverish, I must drink some tea and 
get a sweat. Those damned railings in the school garden, 
they 11 give me something to think about yet, and then, 



THE CASTLE 


309 

already chilled to the bone, I had to run about all night 
afterwards. One sacrifices one's health for things not 
really worth it, without noticing it at the time. But 
you, Land Surveyor, mustn't let yourself be disturbed 
by me, come into the room here with us, pay me a 
sick visit, and at the same time tell Frieda whatever 
you have still to say to her. When two who are accus- 
tomed to one another say good-bye, naturally they have 
a great deal to say to each other at the last minute which 
a third party, even if he's lying in bed waiting for his 
tea to come, can't possibly understand. But do come 
in. I'll be perfectly quiet." " That's enough, enough ! " 
said Frieda pulling at his arm. " He's feverish and 
'doesn't know what he's saying. But you, K., don't you 
come in here, I beg you not to. It's my room and 
Jeremiah's, or rather it's my room and mine alone, 
I forbid you to come in with us. You always persecute 
me ; oh, K,, why do you always persecute me ? Never, 
never will I go back to you, I shudder when I think of 
the very possibility. Go back to your girls ; they sit 
beside you before the fire in nothing but their shifts, 
I've been told, and when anybody comes to fetch you 
they spit at him. You must feel at home there, since 
the place attracts you so much. I've always tried to 
keep you from going there, with little success, but all 
the same I've tried ; all that's past now, you are free. 
You've a lovely life in front of you ; for the one you'll 
perhaps have to squabble a little with the servants, but 
as for the other, there's nobody in heaven or earth that 
will grudge you her. The union is blessed beforehand. 
Don't deny it, I know you can disprove anything, but 
in the end nothing is disproved. Only think, Jeremiah, 
he has disproved everything I " They nodded with a 
smile of mutual understanding. " But,' Frieda went 



THE CASTLE 


310 

on, “ even if everything were disproved, what would 
be gained by that, what would it matter to me ? What 
happens in that house is purely their business and his 
business, no tmine. ^Mine is to nurse you till you're 
well again, as you were at one time, before K. tormented 
you for my sake." " So you're not coming in after 
all. Land Surveyor ? " asked Jeremiah, but was now 
definitely dragged away by Frieda, who did not even 
turn to look at K. again. There was a little door down 
there, still lower than the doors in the ‘passage — not 
Jeremiah only, even Frieda had to stoop on entering — 
within it seemed to be bright and warm, a few whispers 
were audible, probably loving cajolements to get 
Jeremiah to bed, then the door was closed. 


Here the text of the first German edition of The Castle 
ends. It has been translated by 

WiLLA AND Edwin Muir. 

What follows is the continuation of the text together with 
additional material (different versions, fragments, passages 
deleted by the author, etc,^ as found among Kafka* s papers after 
the publication of the first edition and included by the editor. 
Max Brod, in the definitive German edition. The translation 
IS by 

Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser 


Only now did K. notice how quiet it had become in the 
passage, not only here in this part of tlie passage where 



THE CASTLE 


311 

he had been with Frieda, and which seemed to belong 
to the public rooms of the inn, but also in the long 
passage with the rooms that had earlier been so full of 
bustle. So the gentlemen had gonf to sleep at last after 
all. K. too was very tired, perhaps it was from fatigue 
that he had not stood up to Jeremiah as he should have. 
It would perhaps have been more prudent to take his 
cue from Jeremiah, who was obviously exaggerating how 
bad his chill was — his woefulness was not caused by his 
having a chill, it was congenital and could not be 
relieved by any herbal tea — to take his cue entirely from 
Jeremiah, make a similar display of his own really great 
fatigue, sink down here in the passage, which would in 
itself afford much relief, sleep a little, and then perhaps 
be nursed a little too. Only it would not have worked 
out as favourably as with Jeremiah, who would certainly 
have won this competition for sympathy, and rightly so, 
probably, and obviously every other fight too. K. was 
so tired that he wondered whether he might not try to 
go into one of these rooms, some of which were stue to 
be empty, and have a good sleep in a luxurious bed. In 
his view this might turn out to be recompense for many 
things. He also had a night-cap handy. On the tray 
that Frieda had left on the floor there had been a small 
decanter of rum. K. did not shrink from the exertion of 
making his way back, and he drained the little bottle to 
the dregs. 

Now he at least felt strong enough to go before 
Erlanger. He looked for the door of Erlanger's room, 
but since the servant and Gerstacker were no longer to 
be seen and all the doors looked alike, he could not find 
it. Yet he believed he remembered more or less in what 
part of the passage the door had been, and decided to 
open a door that in his opinion was probably the one he 



THE CASTLE 


312 

was looking for. The experiment could not be so very 
dangerous ; if it was Erlanger's room Erlangcr would 
doubtless receive him, if it was somebody else's room it 
would still be possible to apologise and go away again, 
and if the inmate was asleep, which was what was 
probable, then K.'s visit would not be noticed at all ; 
it could turn out badly only if the room was empty, for 
then K. would scarcely be able to resist the temptation 
to get into the bed and sleep for ages. He once more 
glanced along the passage to right and to left, to see 
whether after all there might not be somebody coming 
who would be able to give him some information and 
make the venture unnecessary, but the long passage was 
quiet and empty. Then K. listened at the door. Here 
too was no inmate. He knocked so quietly that it could 
not have wakened a sleeper, and when even now nothing 
happened he opened the door very cautiously indeed. 
But now he was met with a faint scream. 

It was a small room, more than half filled by a wide 
bed, on the night-table the electric lamp was burning, 
beside it was a travelling handbag. In the bed, but 
completely hidden under the quilt, someone stirred 
uneasily and whispered through a gap between quilt and 
sheet : Who is it ? Now K, could not withdraw 
again so easily, discontentedly he surveyed the voluptuous 
but unfortunately not empty bed, then remembered the 
question and gave his name. This seemed to have a 
good effect, the man in the bed pulled the quilt a little 
off his face, anxiously ready, however, to cover himself 
up again completely if something was not quite all right 
out there. But then he flung back the quilt without 
qualms and sat up. It was certainly not Erlanger. It 
was a small, well-looking gentleman whose face had a 
ccruin contradictoriness in it in that the cheeks were 



THE CASTLE 


JI3 

chubby as a child's and the eyes merry as a child's, but 
rhat the high forehead, the pointed nose, the narrow 
mouth, the lips of which would scarcely remain closed, 
the almost vanishing chin, were not like a child's at all, 
but revealed superior intellect. It was doubtless his 
satisfaction with this, his satisfaction with himself, that 
had preserved in him a marked residue of something 
healthily childlike. ‘‘Do you know Friedrich?" he 
asked. K. said he did not. But he knows you," the 
gentleman said, smiling. K. nodded, there was no lack 
of people who knew him, this was indeed one of the 
main obstacles in his way. " I am his secretary," the 
^gentleman said, ‘‘ my name is Biirgel.'' " Excuse me," 
K. said, reaching for the door-handle, ** I am sorry, I 
mistook your door for anotlier. The fact is I liavc been 
summoned to Secretary Erlanger." " What a pity," 
Burgel said. " Not that you are summoned elsewhere, 
but that you made a mistake about the doors. The fact 
is once I am wakened I am quite certain not to go to 
sleep again. Still, that need not sadden you so much, it's 
my personal misfortune. Why, anyway, can't these 
doors be locked, eh ? There's a reason for that, of course. 
Because, according to an old saying, the secretaries' doors 
sliould always be open. But that, again, need not be 
taken quite so literally." Burgel looked queryingly and 
merrily at K., in contrast to his lament he seemed 
thoroughly well rested ; Burgel had doubtless never in 
his life been as tired as K. was now. " Where do you 
think of going now ? " Burgel asked. " It's four o'clock. 
Anyone to whom you might think of going you would 
have to wake, not everybody is as used to being disturbed 
as I am, not everyone will put up with it as tolerantly, 
the secretaries are a nervous species. So stay for a little 
while. Round about five o'clock people here begin to 



THE CASTLE 


314 

get up, then you will be best able to answer your 
summons. So please do let go of the door-handle now 
and sit down somewhere, granted there isn’t overmuch 
room here, it will be^ best if you sit here on the edge of 
the bed. You are surprised that I should have neither 
chair nor table here ? Well, I had the choice of getting 
either a completely furnished room with a narrow hotel 
bed, or this big bed and nothing else except the wash- 
stand. I chose the big bed, after all, in a bedroom the 
bed is undoubtedly the main thing ! AK, for anyone 
who could stretch out and sleep soundly, for a sound 
sleeper, this bed would surely be truly delicious. But 
even for me, perpetually tired as I am without being able 
to sleep, it is a blessing, I spend a large part of the day in 
it, deal with all my correspondence in it, here conduct all 
the interviews with applicants. It works quite well. 
Of course the applicants have nowhere to sit, but they 
get over that, and after all it’s more agreeable for them 
too if they stand and the recorder is at ease than if they 
sit comfortably and get barked at. So the only place I 
have to offer is this here on the edge of the bed, but that 
is not an official place and is only intended for nocturnal 
conversations. But you are so quiet. Land Surveyor ? " 
I am very tired,” said K., who on receiving the 
invitation had instantly, rudely, without respect, sat 
down on the bed and leaned against the post. ” Of 
course,” Biirgel said, laughing, ” everybody is tired here. 
The work, for instance, that I got through yesterday 
and have already got through even to-day is no small 
matter. It’s completely out of the question of course 
that I should go to sleep now, but if this most utterly 
improbable thing should happen after all and I should 
go to sleep while you are still here, then please stay 
quiet and don't open the door, either. But don’t worrjs 



THE CASTLE 


315 

I shall certainly not go to sleep or at best only for a few 
minutes. The way it is with me is that probably because 
I am so very used to dealing with applicants I do actually 
tind it easiest to go to sleep when I have company.'' 
‘'Do go to sleep, please do, Mr. * Secretary, K. said, 
pleased at this announcement, " I shall then, with your 
permission, sleep a little too." " No, no," Burgel said, 
laughing again, " unfortunately I can't go to sleep merely 
on being invited to do so, it s only in the course of 
conversation that the opportunitiy may arise, it's most 
likely to be a conversation that puts me to sleep. Yes, 
one's nerves suffer in our business. I, for instance, am a 
, liaison secretary. You don't know what that is? Well, 

I constitute the strongest liaison " — here he hastily 
rubbed his hands in involuntary merriment — " between 
Friedrich and the village, I constitute the liaison between 
his Castle and village secretaries, am mostly in the 
village, but not permanently ; at every moment I must 
he prepared to drive up to the Castle. You see the 
travelling-bag — a restless life, not suitable for everyone. 
On the other hand it is true that now I could not do 
without this kind of work, all other work would seem 
insipid to me. And how do things stand with the land- 
surveying ? " "I am not doing any such work, J am 
not being employed as a Land Surveyor," K. said, he was 
not really giving his mind to the matter, actually he was 
only yearning for Burgel to fall asleep, but even this 
was only out of a certain sense of duty towards himself, 
in^his heart of hearts he was sure that the moment when 
Burgel would go to sleep was still infinitely remote. 
“ That is amazing," Burgel said with a lively jerk of his 
head, and pulled a note-pad out from under the quilt in 
order to make a note. "You are a Land Surveyor and 
have no land-surveying to do." K. nodded mechanically, 



THE CASTLE 


316 

he had stretched out his left arm along the top of the 
bed-post and laid his head on it, he had already tried 
various ways of making himself comfortable, but this 
position was the most comfortable of all, and now, too, 
he could attend a little better to what Biirgel was saying. 
'' I am prepared,** Biirgel continued, to follow up this 
matter further. With us here things are quite certainlj 
not in such a way that an expert employee should be lefi 
unused. And it must after all be painful to you too 
Doesn't it cause you distress ? ** It causes ’me distress,* 
K. said slowly and smiled to himself, for just now it wai 
not distressing him in the least. Besides, Burgel's offer 
made little impression on him. It was utterly dilettante. 
Without knowing anything of the circumstances under' 
which K.*s appointment had come about, of the difficulties 
that it encountered in the community and at the Castle, 
of the complications that had already occurred during K.*s 
sojourn here or had been foreshadowed, without knowing 
anything of all this, indeed without even showing, what 
should have been expected of a secretary as a matter of 
course, that he had at least itn inkling of it all, he 
offered to settle the whole affair up there in no time at 
all with the aid of his little note-pad. ** You seem to 
have had some disappointments,'* Biirgel said, by this 
remark showing that he had after all some knowledge of 
human nature, and indeed, since entering the room, K. 
had from time to time reminded himself not to under- 
estimate Biirgel, but in his state it was difficult to form 
a fair judgment of anything but his own weariness. 

No," Biirgel said, as if he were answering a thought of 
K.'s and were considerately trying to save him the effort 
of formulating it aloud. "You must not let yourself 
be frightened off by disappointments. Much here does 
seem to be arranged in such a way as to frighten people 



THE CASTLE 


317 

ofF, and when one is newly arrived here the obstacles 
do appear to be completely unsurmountable. I don't 
want to enquire into what all this really amounts to, 
perhaps the appearance does really correspond to the 
reality, in my position I lack the right detachment to 
come to a conclusion about that, but pay attention, 
there are sometimes after all opportunities that are almost 
not in accord with the general situation, opportunities in 
which by means of a word, a glance, a sign of trust, more 
can be achieved than by means of lifelong exhausting 
efforts. Indeed, that is how it is. But, then again, of 
course, these opportunities are in accord with the general 
^^situation in so far as they are never made use of. But 
why then are they never made use of? I ask time and 
again.'* K. did not know why ; he did certainly realise 
that what Biirgel was talking about probably concerned 
him closely, but he now felt a great dislike of everything 
that concerned him, he shifted his head a little to one 
side as though in this manner he were making way for 
Burgel's questions and could no longer be touched by 
them. “It is," Biirgel continued, stretching his arms 
and yawning, which was in bewildering contradiction to 
the gravity of his words, “it is a constant complaint 
of the secretaries that they are compelled to carry out 
most of the village interrogations by night. But why do 
they complain of this ? Because it is too strenuous for 
them ? Because they would rather spend the night 
sleeping ? No, that is certainly not wliat they complain 
of Among the secretaries there are of course those who 
are hard-working and those who are less hard-working, 
as everywhere ; but none of them complains of excessive 
exertion, and least of all in public. That is simply not 
our way. In this respect we make no distinction between 
ordinary time and working-time. Such distinctions are 



THE CASTLE 


318 

alien to us. But what then have the secretaries got against 
the night interrogations ? Is it perhaps consideration for 
the applicants ? No, no, it is not that either. Where 
the applicants are cqncerned the secretaries are ruthless, 
admittedly not a jot more ruthless than towards them- 
selves, but merely precisely as ruthless. Actually this 
ruthlessness is, when you come to think of it, nothing 
but a rigid obedience to and execution of their duty, the 
greatest consideration that the applicants can really wish 
for. And this is at bottom — granted, ' a superficial 
observer does not notice this — completely recognised ; 
indeed, it is, for instance in this case, precisely . the 
night interrogations that are welcomed by the applicants, 
no objections in principle come in regarding the night 
interrogations. Why then nevertheless the secretaries' 
dislike ? This K. did not know either, he knew so 
little, he could not even distinguish where Biirgel was 
seriously or only apparently expecting an answer. ‘ If 
you let me lie down in your bed,' he thought, ‘ I shall 
answer all your questions for you at noon to-morrow or, 
better still, to-morrow evening.' But Biirgel did not 
seem to be paying any attention to him, he was far too 
much occupied with the question that he had put to 
himself; So far as I can see and so far as my own 
experience takes me, the secretaries have the following 
qualms regarding the night interrogations : the night is 
less suitable for negotiations with applicants for the 
reason that by night it is difficult or positively impossible 
completely to preserve the officii character of •> the 
negotiations. This is not a matter of externals, the forms 
can of course, if desired, be just as strictly observed by 
night as by day. So it is not that, on the other liand the 
official power of judgment suffers at night. One tends 
involuntarily to judge things from a more private point 



THE CASTLE 


319 

of view at night, the allegations of the applicants rake 
on more weight than is due to them, the judgment of the 
case becomes adulterated with quite irrelevant con- 
siderations of the rest of the applicants' situation, their 
sufferings and anxieties, the necessary barrier between 
the applicants and the officials, even though externally 
it may be impeccably maintained, weakens, and where 
otherwise, as is proper, only questions and answers are 
exchanged, what sometimes seems to take place is an 
odd, wholly linsuitable changing of places between the 
persons. This at least is what the secretaries say, and 
they are of course the people who, through their vocation, 
(are endowed with a quite extraordinary subtlety of feeling 
in such matters. But even they — and this has often 
been discussed in our circles — notice little of those 
unfavourable influences during the night interrogations ; 
on the contrary, they exert themselves right from the 
beginning to counteract them and end up by believing 
they have achieved quite particularly good results. If, 
however, one reads the records through afterwards one 
is often amazed at their obvious and glaring weaknesses. 
And these are defects, and, what is more, ever and again 
mean half- unjustified gains for the applicants, which 
at least according to our regulations cannot be repaired 
by the usual direct method. Quite certainly they will at 
some later time be corrected by a control-office, but this 
will only profit the law, but will not be able to damage 
that applicant any more. Are the complaints of the 
secretaries under such circumstances not thoroughly 
justified ? " K. had already spent a little while sunk in 
half-sleep, but now he was roused again. ‘ Why all 
this T Why all this ? ' he wondered, and from under 
lowered eyelids considered Biirgel not like an official 
discussing difficult questions with him, but only like 



THE CASTLE 


320 

something that was preventing him from sleeping and 
whose further meaning he could not discover. But 
Biirgel, wholly abandoned to the pursuit of his thoughts, 
smiled, as though had just succeeded in misleading 
K. a little. Yet he was prepared to bring him back 
on to the right road immediately. " Well," he said, 
" on the other hand one cannot simply go and call these 
complaints quite justified, either. The night interroga- 
tions are, indeed, nowhere actually prescribed by the 
regulations, so one is not offending against any regulation 
if one tries to avoid them, but conditions, the excess of 
work, the way the officials are occupied in the Castle, how 
indispensable they are, the regulation that the interroga- 
tion of applicants is to take place only after the final 
conclusion of all the rest of the investigation, but then 
instantly, all this and much else has after all made the 
night interrogations an indispensable necessity. But if 
now they have become a necessity — this is what I say— 
this is nevertheless also, at least indirectly, a result of the 
regulations, and to find fault with the nature of the night 
interrogations would then almost mean — I am, of course, 
exaggerating a little, and only since it is an exaggeration 
can I utter it, as such — would then indeed mean finding 
fault with the regulations. 

" On the other hand it may be conceded to the secre- 
taries tliat they should try as best they can to safeguard 
themselves, within the terms of the regulations, against 
the night interrogations and their perhaps only apparent 
disadvantages. This is in fact what they do, and inydeed 
to the greatest extent. They permit only subject^ of 
negotiation from which there is in every sense as little 
as possible to be feared, test themselves closely prior to 
negotiations and, if the result of the test demands it, 
even at the very last moment cancel all examinations, 



THE CASTLE 


321 

Strengthen their hand by summoning an applicant often 
as many as ten times before really dealing with him, have 
a liking for sending along to deputise for them colleagues 
who are not competent to deal wifh the given case and 
w ho can, therefore, handle it with greater ease, schedule 
the negotiations at least for the beginning or the end of 
the night, avoiding the middle hours, there are many 
more such meastures, the secretaries are not the people to 
let anyone get the better of them so easily, they are 
almost as resilient as they are vulnerable/* K. was asleep, 
it w'as not real sleep, he could hear Biirgers words 
perhaps better than during his former dead-tired state of 
waking, word after word struck his ear, but the tiresome 
consciousness had gone, he felt free, it w^as no longer 
Biirgel who held him, only he still sometimes groped 
towards Biirgel, he was not yet in the depths of sleep, but 
immersed in it he certainly was. No one should deprive 
him of that now. And it seemed to him as though with 
this he had achieved a great victory and already there was 
a party of people there to celebrate it, and he or perhaps 
someone else raised the champagne glass in lionour of 
this victory. And so that all should know what it was 
all about the fight and the victory w^ere repeated once 
again or perhaps not repeated at all, but only rook place 
now^ and had already been celebrated earlier and there 
was no leaving oft celebrating it, because fortunately the 
outcome was certain. A secretary, naked, very like the 
statue of a Greek god, was hard pressed by K. in the 
It was very funny and K. in his sleep smiled 
gently about how the secretary was time and again 
startled out of his proud attitude by K.*s assaults and 
would hastily have to use his raised arm and clenched 
fist to cover unguarded parts of his body and yet was 
always too slow in doing so. The fight did not last long 

II 



THE CASTLE 


322 

Step lor step, and they were very big steps, K. advanced* 
Was it a fight at all ? There was no serious obstacle, 
only now and then a squeak from the secretary. This 
Greek god squeaked like a girl being tickled. And 
finally he was gone, K. was alone in a large room, ready 
for battle he turned round, looking for his opponent ; 
but there was no longer anyone there, the company had 
also scattered, only the fhampagne glass lay broken on 
the floor, K. trimpled it to smithereens. But the 
splinters pricked him, with a start he woke once again, 
he felt sick, like a small child being waked up. Never- 
theless, at the sight of Burgers bare chest a thought that 
was part his dream brushed his awareness : Here you 
have your Greek god I Go on, haul him out of bed ! 

There is, however,*' Btirgel said, his face thoughtfully 
tilted towards the ceiling, as though he were searching 
his memory for examples, but without being able to 
find any, ** there is, however, nevertheless, in spite of all 
precautionary measures, a way in which it is possible for 
the applicants to exploit this nocturnal weakness of the 
secretaries — always assuming that it is a weakness — to 
their own advantage. Admittedly, a very rare possibility, 
or, rather, one that almost never occurs. It consists in 
the applicant's coming unannounced in the middle of 
the night. You marvel, perhaps, that this, although it 
seems to be so obvious, should happen so very seldom. 
Well, yes, you are not familiar with conditions here. 
But even you must, I suppose, have been struck by the 
foolproofness of the official organisation. Now fromrthis 
foolproofness it does result that everyone who has any 
petition or who must be interrogated in any matter for 
other reasons, instantly, without delay, usually indeed 
even before he has worked the matter out for himself, 
more, indeed, even before he himself knows of it, lias 



THE CASTLE 


32? 

already received the summons. He is not yet questioned 
this time, usually not yet questioned, the matter has 
usually not yet reached that stage, but he has the 
summons, he can no longer come ytiannounced, at best 
he can come at the wrong time, well, then ail that 
liappens is that his attention is drawn to the date and 
rhe hour of the summons, and if he then comes back at 
rhe right time he is as a rule s^^nt away, that no longer 
causes any difficulty ; having the summons in the 
applicant’s hand and the case noted in the files arc, it is 
true, not always adequate, but, nevertheless, powerful 
defensive weapons for the secretaries. This refers 
admittedly only to the secretary in whose competence 
the matter happens to lie ; it v\'Ould still, of course, be 
open to every^one to approach the others in the night, 
taking them by surprise. Yet this is something scarcely 
anj’one will do, it is almost senseless. First of all it 
w’ould mean greatly annoying the competent secretary. 
We secretaries are, it is true, by no means jealous of 
each other with regard to work, as everyone carries far 
too great a burden of work, a burden that is piled on 
him truly without stint, but in dealing with the 
applicants we simply must not tolerate any interference 
with our sphere of competence. Many a one before now 
has lost the game because, thinking he was not making 
progress with the competent authority, he tried to slip 
through by approaching some other, one not competent. 
Such attempts must, besides, fail also because of the 
facfr that a non-competent secretary, even when he is 
taken unawares at dead of night and has the best will to 
help, precisely as a consequence of his non-competence 
can scarcely intervene any more cfiectively than the next 
best lawyer, indeed at bottom much less so, for what he 
lacks, of course — even if otherwise he could do something, 



THE CASTLE 


324 

since after all he knows the secret paths of the law 
better than all these legal gentry — concerning things 
with regard to which he is not competent, what he lacli 
is quite simply time,, he hasn't a moment to spare for it. 
So who then, the prospects being such, would spend his 
nights playing the non-competent secretary ? Indeed, the 
applicants are in any case fully occupied if, besides 
carrying out their normal duties, they wish to respond to 
the summonses and hints from the competent authorities, 
’ fully occupied ' that is to say in the sense in which it 
concerns the applicants, which is, of course, far from 
being the same as * fully occupied ' in the sense in which 
it concerns the secretaries." K. nodded, smiling, he 
believed he now understood everything perfectly ; not 
because it concerned him, but because he was now 
convinced he would fall fast asleep in the next few 
minutes, this time without dreaming or being disturbed ; 
between the competent secretaries on the one hand and 
the non-competent on the other, and confronted with the 
crowd of fully occupied applicants, he would sink into 
deep sleep and in this way escape everything. Burgel's 
quiet, self-satisfied voice, which was obviously doing its 
best to put its owner to sleep, was something he had now 
become so used to that it would do more to put him to 
sleep than to disturb him. ‘ Clatter, mill, clatter on and 
on,' he thought, ' you clatter just for me.' " Where 
then, now," Biirgel said, fidgeting at his underlip with 
two fingers, with widened eyes, craning neck, rather as 
though after a strenuous long walk he were approaching a 
delightful view, " where then, now, is that previously 
mentioned, rare possibility that almost never occurs ? 
The secret lies in the regulations regarding competence. 
The fact is things are not so constituted, and in such a 
large living organisation cannot be so constituted, that 



THE CASTLE 


J^5 

there is only one definite secretary competent to deal 
with each case. It is rather that one is competent above 
all others, but many others are in certain respects, even 
though to a smaller degree, also competent. Who, even 
■if he were the hardest of workers, could keep together on 
his desk, single-handed, all the aspects of even the most 
minor incident? Even what I have been saying about 
the competence above all others ^s saying too much. For 
is not the whole competence contained even in the 
smallest ? not what is decisive here the passion with 
which the case is tackled ? And is this not always the 
same, always present in full intensity ? In all things 
there may be distinctions among the secretaries, and there 
are countless such distinctions, but not in the passion ; 
none of them will be able to restrain himself if it is 
demanded of him that he shall concern himself with a 
case in regard to which he is competent if only in the 
smallest degree. Outwardly, indeed, an orderly mode of 
negotiation must be established, and so it comes about 
that a particular secretary comes into the foreground for 
each applicant, one they have, officially, to keep to. 
This, however, does not even need to be the one who is 
m the highest degree competent in regard to the case, 
what is decisive here is the organisation and its particular 
needs of the moment. That is the general situation. 
And now. Land Surveyor, consider the possibility that 
through some circumstances or other, in spite of the 
obstades already described to you, which are in general 
quite sufficient, an applicant does nevertheless, in the 
middle of the night, surprise a secretary who has a 
certain degree of competence with regard to the given 
case. I dare say you have never thought of such a 
possibility ? I am quite prepared to believe it. Nor is it 
at all necessary to think of it, for it does, after all, 



THE CASTLE 


326 

praaically never occur. What sort of oddly and quite 
specially constituted, small, skilful grain would such an 
applicant have to be in order to slip through the incompar- 
able sieve ? You think it cannot happen at all ? You are 
right, it cannot happen at all. But some night — for who 
can vouch for everything ? — it does happen. Admittedly, 
I don*t know anyone among my acquaintances to whom 
it has ever happened, well, it is true that proves very 
little, the circle of my acquaintances is restricted in 
comparison to the number involved here, an'd besides it is 
by no means certain that a secretary to whom such .1 
thing has happened will admit it, since it is, after all, a 
very personal affair and one that in a sense gravely touches 
the official sense of shame. Nevertheless my experience 
docs perhaps prove that what we are concerned with is a 
matter so rare, actually only existing by way of rumour, 
not confirmed by anything else at all, that there is, 
therefore, really no need to be afraid of it. Even if it were 
really to happen, one can — one would think — positively 
render it harmless by proving to it, which is very easy, 
that there is no room for it in this world. In any case 
It is morbid to be so afraid of it that on * hides, say, under 
the quilt and does not dare to peep out. And even if 
this perfect improbability should suddenly have taken on 
shape, is then everything lost ? On the contrary. That 
everything should be lost is yet more improbable than 
the most improbable thing itself. Granted, if the 
applicant is actually in the room things are in a very^ bad 
way. It constricts the heart, * How long will yow be 
able to put up resistance ? ' one wonders. But it wiirbe 
no resistance at all, one knows that. You must only 
picture the situation correctly. The never-beheld, always- 
expected applicant, truly thirstingly expected and alwa)\s 
reasonably regarded as out of reach — there this applicant 



THE CASTLE 


327 

sits. By his mute presence, if by nothing else, he con- 
stitutes an invitation to penetrate into his poor life, to 
look around there as in one’s own property and there to 
suffer with him under the weight of his futile demands. 
This invitation in the silent night is beguiling. One gives 
way to it, and now one has actually ceased to function in 
one’s official capacity. It is a situation in which it very^ 
soon becomes impossible to refuse to do a favour. To 
put it precisely, one is desperate ; to put it still more 
precisely, onS is very happy. Desperate, for the defence- 
less position in which one sits here waiting for the 
applicant to utter his plea and knowing that once it is 
uttered one must grant it, even if, at least in so far as one 
has oneself a general view of the situation, it positively 
tears the official organisation to shreds : this is, I 
suppose, the worst thing that can happen to one in the 
fulfilment of one’s duties. Above all — apart from every- 
thing else — because it is also a promotion, one surpassing 
all conceptions, that one here for the moment usurps. 
For it is inherent in our position that we are not em- 
powered to grant pleas such as that with which we arc 
here concerned, yet through the proximity of this 
nocturnal applicant our official powers do in a manner of 
speaking grow, we pledge ourselves to do things that arc 
outside our scope ; indeed, we shall even fulfil our 
pledges. The applicant wrings from us in the night, as 
the robber does in the forest, sacrifices of which we should 
otherwise never be capable ; well, all right, that is the 
\v3L)i it is now when the applicant is still there, strengthen- 
ing us and compelling us and spurring us on, and while 
everything is still h^f unconsciously under way ; but 
how it will be afterwards, when it is all over, when, sated 
and carefree, the applicant leaves us and there we are, 
alone, defenceless in the face of our misuse of official 



THE CASTLE 


328 

power — that does not bear thinking off Nevertheless, 
wc are happy. How suicidal happiness can be I We 
might, of course, exert ourselves to conceal the true 
position from the applicant. He himself will scarcely 
notice anything of his own accord. He has, after all, in 
his own opinion probably only for some indifferent, 
accidental reasons — being overtired, disappointed, ruth- 
less and indifferent from ^over-fatigue and disappointment 
— pushed his way into a room other than the one he 
wanted to enter, he sits there in ignorance, occupied with 
his thoughts, if he is occupied at all, with his mistake or 
with his fatigue. Could one not leave him in that 
situation ? One cannot. With the loquacity of those 
who are happy one has to explain everything to him. 
Without being able to spare oneself in the slightest one 
must show him in detail what has happened and for what 
reasons this has happened, how extraordinarily rare and 
how uniquely great the opportunity is, one must show 
how the applicant, though he has stumbled into this 
opportunity in utter helplessness such as no other being 
is capable of than precisely an applicant, can, however, 
now, if he wants to. Land Surveyor, dominate everything 
and to that end has to do nothing but in some way or 
other put forward his plea, for which fulfilment is already 
waiting, which indeed it is already coming to meet, all 
this one must show ; it is the official’s hour of travail. 
But when one has done even that, then, Land Surveyor, 
all that is essential has been done, then one must resign 
oneself and wait.’' ^ 

K. was asleep, impervious to all that was happening. 
His head, which had at first been lying on his left arm 
on top of the bedpost, had slid down as he slept and now 
hung unsupported, slowly drooping lower ; the support 
of the arm above was no longer sufficient ; involuntarily 



THE CASTLE 


3^9 

K. provided himself with new support by planting his 
right hand firmly against the quilt, whereby he accident- 
ally took hold of Burgers foot, which happened to be 
sticking up under the quilt. Biiigel looked down and 
abandoned the foot to him, tiresome though this might 
be. 

Now there came some vigorous knocking on the 
partition wall. K. started upland looked at the wall. 

Isn't the Land Surveyor there ? " a voice asked. ** Yes," 
Biirgel said,*frecd his foot from K.'s hold and suddenly 
stretched wildly and wantonly like a little hoy. " Then 
tell him it’s high time for him to come over here," the 
voice continued ; there was no consideration show'n for 
Biirgel or for whether he might still require K.'s presence. 
" It's Erlanger," Biirgel said in a whisper, seeming not 
at all surprised that Erlanger w'as in the next room. " Go 
to him at once, he's already annoyed, try to conciliate 
him. He's a sound sleeper ; but still, we have been 
talking too loudly ; one cannot control oneself and one's 
voice when one is speaking of certain things. Well, go 
along now, you don't seem able to shake yourself out of 
your sleep. Go along, what are you still doing here 7 
No, you don't need to apologise for being sleepy, why 
should you 7 One's physical energies last only to a 
certain limit. Who can help the fact that precisely this 
limit is significant in other ways too ? No, nobody can 
help it. That is how the world itself corrects the 
deviations in its course and maintains the balance. This 
is indeed an excellent, time and again unimaginably 
excellent arrangement, even if in other respects dism d 
and cheerless. Well, go along, I don't know why you look 
at me like that. If you delay much longer Erlanger will 
be down on me, and that is something I should very much 
like to avoid. Go along now. Who knows what awaits 



THE CASTLE 


330 

you over there ? Ever)Thing here is full of opportunities, 
after all. Only there are, of course, opportunities that 
are, in a manner of speaking, too great to be made use of, 
there are things that ^are wrecked on nothing but them- 
selves. Yes, that is astonishing. For the rest, I hope I 
shall now be able to get to sleep for a while after all. 
Of course, it is five o'clock by now and the noise will 
soon be beginning. If ypu would only go ! " 

Stunned by being suddenly waked up out of deep 
sleep, still boundlessly in need of sleep, his* body aching 
all over from having been in such an uncomfortable 
position, K. could for a long time not bring himself to 
stand up, but held his forehead and looked down at his 
lap. Even Burgel's continual dismissals would not have 
been able to make him go, it was only a sense of the utter 
uselessness of staying any longer in this room that slowly 
brought him to it. How indescribably dreary this room 
seemed to him. Whether it had become so or had been 
so all the time, he did not know. Here he would not 
even succeed in going to sleep again. This conviction 
was indeed the decisive factor ; smiling a little at this, he 
rose, supporting himself wherever he K)und any support, 
on the bed,' on the wall, on the door, and, as though he 
had long ago taken leave of Btirgel, left without saying 
goodbye. 


XIX 

P ROBABLY he would have walked past Erlanger's 
room just as indilFerently if Erlanger had not been 
standing in the open door, beckoning to him. One short 
sign with the forefinger. Erlanger was already completel}’ 



THE CASTLE 


331 

dressed to go out, he wore a black fur coat with a tight 
collar buttoned up high. A servant was just handing him 
his gloves and was still holding a fur cap. ‘‘ You should 
have come long ago," Erlanger said. K. tried to 
apologise. Wearily shutting his eyes, Erlanger indicated 
that he was not interested in hearing apologies. " The 
matter is as follows," he said. " Formerly a certain 
Frieda was employed in the ta^-room ; I only know her 
name, I don't know the girl herself, she is no concern of 
mine. ThiS Frieda sometimes served Klamm with beer. 
Now there seems to be another girl there. Well, this 
change is, of course, probably of no importance to anyone, 
and quite certainly of none to Klamm. But the bigger 
a job is, and Klamm's job is, of course, the biggest, the 
less strength is left over for protecting oneself against the 
external world, and as a result any unimportant alteration 
in the most unimportant things can be a serious dis- 
turbance. The smallest alteration on the writing-desk, 
the removal of a dirty spot that has been rlicre ever 
since anyone can remember, all this can be disturbing, 
and so, in the same way, can a new bar-maid. Well, 
of course, all of this, even if it would distiub anyone 
else and in any given job, does not disturb Klamm ; 
that is quite out of the question. Nevertheless we 
are obliged to keep such a watch over Klamm's comft)rt 
that we remove even disturbances that are not sucli 
for him — and probably there are none whatsoever for 
him — if they strike us as being possible disturbances. 
It is not for his sake, it is not for the sake of his work, 
tKat we remove these disturbances, but for our sake, for 
the sake of our conscience and our peace of mind. For 
this reason this Frieda must at once return to the tap- 
room. Perhaps she will be disturbing precisely through 
the fact of her return ; well, then we shall send her away 



THE CASTLE 


33 ^ 

again, but, for the time being, she must return. You 
are living with her, as I am told, therefore arrange 
immediately for her return. In this no consideration 
can be given to personal feelings, that goes without saying, 
of course, hence I shall not enter into the least further 
discussion of the matter. I am already doing much 
more than is necessary if I mention that if you show 
yourself reliable in this^ trivial affair it may on some 
occasion be of use to you in improving your prospects. 
That is all I have to say to you.*' He gave^K. a nod of 
dismissal, put on the fur cap handed to him by the 
servant, and, followed by the servant, went down the 
passage, rapidly, but limping a little. 

Sometimes orders that were given here were very easy 
to carry out, but this case did not please K. Not only 
because the order affected Frieda and, though intended 
as an order, sounded to K. like scornful laughter, but 
above all because what it confronted K. was with the 
futility of all his endeavours. The orders, the unfavour- 
able and the favourable, disregarded him, and even the 
most favourable probably had an ultimate unfavourable 
core, but in any case they all disregarded him, and he was 
in much too lowly a position to be able to intervene or, 
far less, to silence them and to gain a hearing for his own 
voice. If Erlanger waves you off, what are you going 
to do ? And if he were not to wave you off, what could 
you say to him ? True, K. remained aware that his 
weariness had to-day done him more harm than all the 
unfavourableness of circumstances, but why could ,Jhe, 
who had believed he could rely on his body and who 
would never have started out on his way without that 
conviction, why could he not endure a few bad nights and 
one sleepless night, why did he become so unmanageably 
tired precisely here where nobody was tired or, rather. 



THE CASTLE 


J33 

where everyone was tired all the time, without this, 
however, doing any damage to the work, indeed, even 
seeming to promote it ? The conclusion to be drawn 
from this was that this was in its way a quite different 
sort of fatigue from K/s. Here it was doubtless fatigue 
amid happy work, something that outwardly looked like 
fatigue and was actually indestructible repose, indestruct- 
ible peace. If one is a little tired at noon, that is part 
of the haopy natural course of the day. ** For the 
gentlemen here it is always noon,"' K. said to himself. 

And it was very much in keeping with this that now, 
at five o'clock, things were beginning to stir everywhere 
on each side of the passage. This babel of voices in 
the rooms had something extremely merry about it. Once 
it sounded like the jubilation of children getting ready 
for a picnic, another time like daybreak in a hen-roost, 
like the joy of being in complete accord with the 
awakening day. Somewhere indeed a gentleman imitated 
the crowing of a cock. Though the passage itself was 
still empty, the doors were already in motion, time and 
again one would be opened a little and quickly shut 
again, the passage buzzed with this opening and shutting 
of doors, now and then, too, in the space above the 
partition walls, which did not quite reach to the ceiling, 
K. saw towsled early-morning heads appear and instantly 
vanish again. From far off there slowly came a little 
barrow pushed by a servant, containing files. A second 
servant walked beside it, with a catalogue in his hand, 
qj^viously comparing the numbers on the doors with those 
on the files. The little barrow stopped outside most of 
the doors, usually then, too, the door would open and 
the appropriate files, sometimes, however, only a small 
sheet of paper— in such cases a little conversation came 
about between the room and the passage, probab y t ® 



THE CASTLE 


334 

servant was being reproached — ^would be handed into the 
room. If the door remained shut, the files were carefully 
piled up on the threshold. In such cases it seemed to K. 
as though the movement of the doors round about did 
not diminish, even though there the files had already 
been distributed, but as though it were on the contrary 
increasing. Perhaps the others were yearningly peering 
out at the files incomprehensibly left lying on the 
threshold, they could not understand how anyone should 
only need to open the door in order to gain possession of 
his files and yet should not do so ; perhaps it was even 
possible that files that were never picked up at all might 
later be distributed among the other gentlemen, who 
W’cre even now seeking to make sure, by frequent 
peering out, whether the files were still lying on the 
threshold and whether there was thus still hope for them. 
Incidentally, these files that remained lying were for the 
most parr particularly big bundles ; and K. assumed that 
they had been temporarily left lying out of a certain 
desire to boast or out of malice or even out of a justifiable 
pride that would be stimulating to colleagues. What 
strengthened him in this assumption was the fact that 
sometimes, always when he happened not to be looking, 
the bag, having been exposed to view for long enough, 
was suddenly and hastily pulled into the room and the 
door then remained as motionless as before, the doors 
round about then also became quiet again, disappointed 
or, it might be, content that this object of constant 
provocation had at last been removed, but then, howeifor^ 
they gradually came into motion again. 

K. considered all this not only with curiosity but also 
w ith sympathy. He almost enjoyed the feeling of being 
in the midst of this bustle, looked this way and that, 
following — even though at an appropriate distance — the 



THE CASTLE 


335 

servants, who, admittedly, had already more than once 
turned towards him with a severe glance, with lowered 
head and pursed lips, while he watched their work of 
distribution. The further it progressed the less smoothly 
it went, either the catalogue was not quire correct, or the 
files were not always clearly identifiable for the servants, 
or the gentlemen were raising objections for other 
reasons ; at any rate it woul4 happen that some of the 
distributions had to be withdrawn, then the little barrow 
moved bacTc, and through the chink of the door negotia- 
tions were conducted about the return of files. These 
negotiations in themselves caused great difficulties, but it 
happened frequently enough that if it was a matrci of 
return precisely those doors that had earlier on been in 
the most lively motion now remained inexorably shut, 
as though they did not w'ish to know anything more 
about the matter at all. Only then did the actual 
difficulties begin. He who believed he had a claim to the 
files became extremely impatient, made a great dm inside 
his room, clapping his hands, stamping his feet, ever 
and again shouting a particular file-number out into the 
passage through the chink of the door. Then the little 
barrow was often left quite unattended. The one 
servant was busy trying to appease the impatient official, 
the other was outside the shut door battling for the 
return. Both had a hard time of it. TTie impatient 
official was often made still more impatient by the 
attempts to appease him, he could no longer endure 
listening to the servant's empty words, he did not want 
consolation, he wanted files ; such a gentleman once 
poured the contents of a whole wash-basin through the 
gap at the top, on to the servant. But the other servant, 
obviously the higher in rank, was having a much harder 
time of it. If the gentleman concerned at all deigned to 



THE CASTLE 


336 

enter into negotiations, there were matter-of-fact dis- 
cussions during which the servant referred to his catalogue, 
the gentleman to his notes and to precisely those files that 
he was supposed to return, which for the time being, 
however, he clutched tightly in his hand, so that scarcely 
a corner of them remained visible to the servant s longing 
eyes. Then, too, the servant would have to run back 
for fresh evidence to th^ little barrow, which had by 
itself rolled a little further along the slightly sloping 
passage, or he would have to go to the gentleman claiming 
the files and there report the objections raised by the 
gentleman now in possession, receiving in return fresh 
counter-objections. Such negotiations lasted a very long 
time, sometimes agreement was reached, the gentleman 
would perhaps hand over part of the files or get other 
files as compensation, since all that had happened was 
that a mistake had been made ; but it also happened 
sometimes that someone simply had to abandon all the 
files demanded, either because he had been driven into a 
corner by the servant's evidence or because he was tired 
of the prolonged bargaining, but then he did not give 
rlie files to the servant, but with sudden resolution flung 
them out into the passage, so that the strings came undone 
and the papers flew about and the servants had a great 
deal of trouble getting everything straight again. But 
all this was still relatively simple compared with wliat 
happened when the servant got no answer at all to his 
pleading for the return of the files. Then he would 
stand outside the closed door, begging, imploring, citii^ 
his catalogue, referring to regulations, all in vain, no 
sound came from inside the room, and to go in without 
permission was obviously something the servant had no 
right to do. Then even this excellent servant would 
sometimes lose his self-control, he would go to his 



THE CASTLE 


?37 

barrow, sit down on the files, wipe the sweat from his 
brow and for a little while do nothing at all but sit 
there helplessly swinging his feet. All round there was 
very great interest in the affair, everywhere there was 
whispering going on, scarcely any door was quiet, and 
up above at the top of the partition wail faces quccriy 
masked almost to the eyes with scarves and kerchiefs, 
though for the rest never for ai) instant remaining quiet 
in one place, watched all that was going on. In the 
midst of thfs unrest K. had been struck by the fact that 
Biirgers door had remained shut the whole time and 
that the servant had already passed along this part of the 
passage, but no files had been allotted to Burgcl. Perhaps 
he was still asleep, which would indeed, in all this dm, 
have indicated that he w^as a very sound sleeper, but why 
had he not received any files ? Only very few rooms, 
and these probably unoccupied ones, had been passed 
over in this manner. On the other hand there w'as 
already a new and particularly restless occupant of 
Hrlanger's room, Erlanger must positively have been 
driven out in the night by him, this was not much in 
keeping with Erlanger's cool, distant nature, but the 
fact that he had had to wait on the threshold for K. did 
after all indicate that it was so. 

Ever and again K. would then soon return from all 
distracting observations to watching the servant ; truly, 
what K. had otherwise been told about servants in 
general, about their slackness, their easy life, their 
arrogance, did not apply to this servant, there were 
doubtless exceptions among the servants too or, what was 
more probable, various groups among them, for here, as 
K. noticed, there were many nuances of which he had 
up to now scarcely had as much as a glimpse. What he 
particularly liked was this servant’s inexorability. In his 



THE CASTLE 


338 

Struggle with these stubborn little rooms — to K. it often 
seemed to be a struggle with the rooms, since he scarcely 
ever caught sight of the occupants — the servant never 
gave up. His strength did sometimes fail — whose 
'strength would not nave failed? — but he soon recovered, 
slipped down from the little barrow and, holding himself 
straight, clenching his teeth, returned to the attack 
against the door that had to be conquered. And it would 
happen that he would be beaten back twice or three 
times, and that in a very simple way, solely* by means of 
that confounded silence, and nevertheless was still not 
defeated. Seeing that he could not achieve anything by 
frontal assault, he would try another method, for instance, 
if K. understood rightly, cunning. He would then 
seemingly abandon the door, so to speak allowing it to 
exhaust its own taciturnity, turned his attention to other 
doors, after a while returned, called the other servant, 
all this ostentatiously and noisily, and began piling up 
files on the threshold of the shut door, as though he had 
changed his mind, and as though there were no justification 
for raking anything away from this gentleman, but, on 
the contrary, something to be allotted to him. Then 
he would walk on, still, however, keeping an eye on the 
door, and then when the gentleman, as usually liappened, 
soon cautiously opened the door in order to pull the files 
inside, in a few leaps the servant was there, thrust his 
foot between the door and the doorpost, so forcing the 
gentleman at least to negotiate with him face to face, 
which then usually led after all to a more or less s;y:is- 
factory result. And if this method was not successful 
or if at one door this seemed to him not the right 
approach, he would try another method. He would 
then transfer his attention to the gentleman who was 
claiming the files. Then he pushed aside the other 



THE CASTLE 


339 

servant, who worked always only in a mechanical way, a 
fairly useless assistant to him, and himself began talking 
persuasively to the gentleman, whisperingly, furtively, 
pushing his head right round the door, probably making 
promises to him and assuring him that at the next 
distribution the other gentleman would be appropriately 
punished, at any rate he would often point towards the 
opponent's door and laugh, iti as far as his fatigue 
allowed. Then, however, there w'cre cases, one or two, 
when he did abandon all attemptwS, but even here K. 
believed that it was only an apparent abandonment or at 
least an abandonment for justifiable reasons, for he 
quietly walked on, tolerating, without glancing round, 
the din made by the w’ronged gentleman, only an 
occasional, more prolonged closing of the eyes indicating 
that the din was painful to him. Yet then the gentleman 
w'ould gradually quiet down, and just as a child’s ceaseless 
aying gradually passes into ever less frequent single 
sobs, so it was also with his outcry ; but even after it 
had become quite quiet there, there would, nevertheless, 
sometimes be a single cry or a rapid opening and slam- 
ming of that door. In any case it became apparent that 
lierc, too, the servant had probably acred in exactly the 
right way. Finally there remained only one gentleman 
who would not quiet down, he would be silent for a 
long period, but only in order to gather strength, then he 
would burst out again, no less furiously than before. It 
was not quite clear why he shouted and complained in 
tljffi way, perhaps it was not about the distribution of 
files at all. Meanwhile the servant had finished his 
work ; only one single file, actually only a little piece of 
paper, a leaf from a note-pad, was left in the little 
barrow, tlirough his helper's fault, and now they did not 
know whom to allot it to. ' That might very well be 



THE CASTLE 


340 

niy file,' it flashed through K.'s mind. The Mayor had, 
after all, constantly spoken of this smallest of sm jl cases. 
And, arbitrary and ridiculous though he himself at 
bottom regarded his assumption as being, K. tried to get 
closer to the servant, who was thoughtfully glancing 
over the little piece of paper ; this was not altogether 
easy, for the servant ill repaid K.'s sympathy, even in the 
midst of his most strefvaous work he had always still 
found time to look round at K., angrily or impatiently, 
with nervous jerks of his head. Only now, after 
finishing the distribution, did he seem to have somewhat 
forgotten K., as indeed he had altogether become more 
indifferent, this being understandable as a result of his 
great exhaustion, nor did he give himself much trouble 
with the little piece of paper, perhaps not even reading 
it through, only pretending to do so, and although here 
in the passage he would probably have delighted any 
occupant of a room by allotting this piece of paper to 
him, he decided otherwise, he was now sick and tired of 
distributing things, with his forefinger on his lips he gave 
his companion a sign to be silent, tore — K, was still far 
from having reached his side — the piece of paper into 
shreds and put the pieces into his pocket. It was 
probably the first irregularity that K. had seen in the 
working of the administration here, admittedly it was 
possible that he had misunderstood this too. And even 
if it was an irregularity, it was pardonable ; under the 
conditions prevailing here the servant could not work 
unerringly, some time the accumulated annoyance, 'the 
accumulated uneasiness, must break out, and if it 
manifested itself only in the tearing up of a little piece 
of paper it was still comparatively innocent. For the 
yells of the gentleman who could not be quieted by any 
method were still resounding through the passage, and 



THE CASTLE 


341 

his colleagues, who in other respects did not adopt a very 
friendly attitude to each other, seemed to be wholly of 
one mind with respect to this uproar ; it gradually began 
to seem as if the gentleman had taken on the task of 
making a noise for all those who *simply by calling out 
to him and nodding their heads encouraged him to keep 
it up. But now the servant was no longer paying any 
further attention to the matter^ he had finished his job, 
he pointed to the handle of the little barrow, indicating 
that the otRer servant should take hold of it, and so they 
went away again as they had come, only more contentedly 
and so quickly that the little barrow bounced along ahead 
of them. Only once did they start and glance back 
again, when the gentleman who was ceaselessly screaming 
and shouting, and outside whose door K. was now 
hanging about because he would have liked to discover 
what it really was that the gentleman wanted, evidently 
found shouting no longer adequate, probably had 
discovered the button of an electric bell and, doubtless 
enraptured at being relieved in this way, instead of 
shouting now began an uninterrupted ringing of the bell. 
Hereupon a great muttering began in the other rooms, 
which seemed to indicate approval, the gentleman seemed 
to be doing something that all would have liked to do 
long ago and only for some unknown reason had had to 
leave undone. Was it perhaps attendance, perhaps 
Frieda, for whom the gentleman was ringing ? If that 
was so, he could go on ringing for a long time. For 
Frieda was busy wrapping Jeremiah up in wet sheets, 
and even supposing he were well again by now, she had 
no time, for then she was in his arms. But the ringing 
of the bell did instantly have an effect. Even now the 
landlord of the Herrenhof himself came hastening along 
from far off, dressed in black and buttoned up as always ; 



THE CASTLE 


342 

but it was as though he were forgetful of his dignity, he 
was in such a hurry ; his arms were half outspread, just 
as if he liad been called on account of some great disaster 
and were coming in order to take hold of it and instantly 
smother it against his chest, and at every little irregularity 
in the ringing he seemed briefly to leap into the air and 
hurry on faster still. Now his wife also appeared, a 
considerable distance bejjind him, she too running with 
outspread arms, but her steps were short and affected, 
and K. thought to himself that she would cdhie too late, 
the landlord would in the meantime have done all that 
was necessary. And in order to make room for the 
landlord as he ran K. stood close back against the wall. 
But the landlord stopped straight in front of K., as 
though K. were his goal, and the next instant the land- 
lady was there too, and both overwhelmed him with 
reproaches, which in the suddenness and surprise of it he 
did not understand, especially since the ringing of the 
gentleman's bell was also mixed up with it and other 
bells also began ringing, now no longer indicating a state 
of emergency, but only for fun and in excess of delight. 
Because he was very much concerned to understand 
exactly what his fault was, K. was entirely in agreement 
with the landlord’s taking him by the arm and walking 
away with him out of this uproar, which was continually 
increasing, for behind them — K. did not turn round at 
all, because the landlord, and even more, on the other 
side, the landlady, was talking to him urgently — the 
doors were now opening wide, the passage was becoming 
animated, traffic seemed to be beginning there as in a 
lively narrow little alley, the doors ahead of them were 
evidently waiting impatiently for K. to go past them at 
long last so that they could release the gentlemen, and 
in the midst of all this, pressed again and again, the 



THE CASTLE 


34 ? 

bells kept on ringing as though celebrating a victory. 
Now at last — they were by now again in the quiet white 
courtyard, where some sledges were waiting — K. gradually 
learnt what it was all about. Neither the landlord nor 
the landlady could understand how K. could havfc dared 
to do such a thing. But what had he done ? K. asked 
time and again, but for a long time could not get any 
answer because his guilt was ^1 too much a matter of 
course to the two of them and hence it simply did not 
occur to thtm that he asked in good faith. Only very 
slowly did K. realise how everything stood. He had 
had no right to be in the passage ; in general it was at 
best the tap-room, and this only by way of privilege and 
subject to revocation, to which he had entry. If he was 
summoned by one of the gentlemen, he had, of course, 
to appear in the place to which he was summoned, but 
had to remain always aware — surely he at least had some 
ordinary common sense ? — that he was in a place where 
he actually did not belong, a place whither he had only 
been summoned by one of the gentlemen, and that with 
extreme reluctance and only because it was necessitated 
by ofEcial business. It was up to him, therefore, to 
appear quickly, to submit to the interrogation, then, 
however, to disappear again, if possible even more 
quickly. Had he then not had any feeling at all of the 
grave impropriety of being there in the passage ? But if 
he had had it, how had he brought himself to roam about 
there like cattle at pasture ? Had he not been summoned 
to jttend a night interrogation and did he not know why 
the night interrogations had been introduced ? The 
night interrogations — and here K. was given a new 
explanation of their meaning — had after all only the 
purpose of examining applicants the sight of whom by 
tlay would be unendurable to the gentlemen, and this 



THE CASTLE 


344 

quickly, at night, by artificial light, with the possibility 
of, immediately after the interrogation, forgetting all the 
ugliness of it in sleep. K/s behaviour, however, had 
been a mockery of precautionary measures. Even ghosts 
vanish towards morning, but K. had remained there, his 
hands in his pockets, as though he were expecting that, 
since he did not take himself off, the whole passage with 
all the rooms and gentle;jien would take itself off. And 
this — he could be sure of it — would quite certainly have 
happened if it had been in any way possible, for the 
delicacy of die gentlemen was limitless. None of them 
would drive K. away, or even say, what went after all 
without saying, that he should at long last go away; 
none of them would do that, although during the period 
of K/s presence they were probably trembling with 
agitation and the morning, their favourite time, was 
being ruined for them. Instead of taking any steps 
against K., they preferred to suffer, in which, indeed, a 
certain part was probably played by the hope that K. 
would not be able to help gradually, at long last, coming 
to realise what was so glaringly obvious and, in accord 
with the gentlemen's anguish, would himself begin to 
suffer, to the point of unendurability, from his own 
standing there in the passage in the morning, visible to 
all, in that horribly unfitting manner. A vain hope. 
They did not know or in their kindness and condescension 
did not want to admit there also existed hearts that were 
insensitive, hard, and not to be softened by any feeling of 
reverence. Does not even the nocturnal moth, the ppor 
creature, when day comes seek out a quiet cranny, flatten 
itself out there, oiJy wishing it could vanish and being 
unhappy because it cannot ? K. on the other hand 
planted himself precisely where he was most visible, 
and if by doing so he had been able to prevent day 



THE CASTLE 


345 

from breaking, he would have done so. He could not 
prevent it, but, alas, he could delay it and make it more 
difficult. Had he not watched the distribution of the 
files? Something that nobody was allowed to watch 
except the people most closely involved. Something 
that neither the landlord nor his wife had been allowed 
to see in their own house. Something of which they 
had only heard tell and in allusi(^s, as for instance to-day 
from the servants. Had he then not noticed under what 
difficulties fhc distribution of files had proceeded, some- 
thing in itself incomprehensible, since after all each of 
the gentlemen served only the cause, never thinking of 
his personal advantage and hence being obliged to exert 
all his powers to seeing that the distribution of the files, 
this important, fundamental, preliminary work, should 
proceed quickly and easily and without any mistakes ? 
And had K. then not been even remotely struck by the 
notion that the main cause of all the difficulties was the 
fact that the distribution had had to be carried out with 
the doors almost quite shut, without any chance of 
direct dealings between the gentlemen, who among each 
other naturally could come to an understanding in a 
twinkling, while the mediation through the servants 
inevitably dragged on almost for hours, never could 
function smoothly, was a lasting torment to the gentlemen 
and the servants and would probably have damaging 
consequences in the later work? And why could the 
gentlemen not deal with each other ? Well, did K. still 
no% understand ? The like of it had never occurred in 
th*e experience of the landlady — and the landlord for his 
part confirmed this — and they had, after all, had to deal 
with many sorts of difficult people. Things that in 
general one would not dare to mention in so many words 
one had to tell him frankly, for otherwise he would not 



THE CASTLE 


346 

understand the most essential things. Well, then, since 
it had to be said : it was on his account, solely and 
exclusively on his account, that the gentlemen had not 
been able to come forth out of their rooms, since in the 
morning, so soon after having been asleep, they were too 
bashful, too vulnerable, to be able to expose themselves 
to the gaze of strangers ; they literally felt, however 
completely dressed thej^ might be, too naked to show 
themselves. It was admittedly difficult to say why they 
felt this shame, perhaps these everlasting Workers felt 
shame merely because they had been asleep. But what 
perhaps made them feel even acuter shame than showing 
themselves was seeing strangers ; what they had success- 
fully disposed of by means of the night interrogations, 
namely the sight of the applicants they found so hard to 
endure, they did not want now in the morning to have 
suddenly, without warning, in all its truth to nature, 
obtruding itself upon them all over again. That was 
something they simply could not face. What sort of 
person must it be who failed to respect that ! Well, yes, 
it must be a person like K. Someone who rode rough- 
shod over everything, both over the law and over the 
most ordinary human consideration, with this callous 
indiflerence and sleepiness, someone who simply did not 
care that he was making the distribution of the files almost 
impossible and damaging the reputation of the house and 
who brought about something that had never happened 
before, that the gentlemen, driven to desperation, had 
begun to defend themselves, and, after an overcon\ing 
of their own feelings unimaginable for ordinary people, 
had reached for the bell and called for help to expel this 
person on whom nothing else could make any impression ! 
They, the gentlemen, calling for help ! Would not the 
landlord and his wife and their entire staflF have come 



THE CASTLE 


347 

dashing along ages before that if they had only dared to 
appear before the gentlemen, all unsummoned, in the 
morning, even if it was only in order to bring help and 
flien disappear again at once ? Quivering with indigna- 
tion about K., inconsolable about their own helplessness, 
they had waited there at the end of the passage, and the 
ringing of the bell, which they had never really expected 
to hear at all, had been a gO(i-send to them. Well, 
now the worst was over ! If you could cast a glance 
into the merry bustle among the gentlemen now at long 
last liberated from K. ! For K., of course, it was not 
yet over and done with ; he would certainly have to 
answer for the trouble he had caused here. 

Meanwhile they had entered the tap-room ; why the 
landlord, despite all his anger, had nevertlielcss brought 
K. along here, was not quite clear, perhaps he had after 
all realised that K/s state of fatigue for the present made 
It impossible for him to leave the house. Without 
waiting to be asked to sit down, K. the next moment 
simply collapsed on one of the barrels. There in the 
dark he felt all right. In the large room there was only 
one dim electric bulb burning over the beer-taps. 
Outside, too, there was still deep darkness, there seemed 
to be snow blowing on the wind. Being here in the 
warmth was something to be thankful for and one had 
to take precautions against being driven out. The 
landlord and his wife were still standing before him as 
though even now he still constituted a certain menace, 
as^ chough in view of his utter unreliability it were not 
quite impossible that he might here suddenly start up 
and try to invade the passage once again. Besides, they 
themselves were tired after the shock they had had in the 
night and getting up earlier than usual, especially the 
landlady, who was wearing a silkily rustling, wide-skirted, 



THE CASTLE 


348 

brown dress, buttoned and tied up in a somewhat 
slovenly way — where had she pulled it out from in her 
haste ? — and stood with her head resting, like a drooping 
flower, on her husband's shoulder, dabbing at her eyes 
with a fine cambric handkerchief, now and then casting 
childishly malevolent glances at K. In order to reassure 
the couple, K. said that everything they had told him 
now was entirely new him, but that in spite of his 
ignorance of these facts he would not have remained so 
long in the passage, where he really had had* no business 
to be and where he had certainly not wanted to upset 
anyone, but that all this had only happened because he 
had been excessively tired. He thanked them for having 
put an end to the distressing scene, if he should be taken 
to task about the matter it would be very welcome to him, 
for only in this way could he prevent a general mis- 
interpretation of his behaviour. Fatigue, and nothing 
else, was to blame for it. This fatigue, however, 
originated in the fact that he was not yet used to the 
strenuous nature of the interrogations. After all, he had 
not yet been here long. As soon as he was more ex- 
perienced in these matters, it would become impossible 
for anything of this sort to happen again. Perhaps he 
was taking the interrogations too seriously, but that in 
itself was, after all, probably no disadvantage. He had 
had to go through two interrogations, one following 
quickly on the other, one with Biirgel and the second 
with Erlanger, and the first in particular had greatly 
exhausted him, though the second one had not lasted 
long, Erlanger having only asked him for a favour, but 
both together had been more than he could stand at one 
go, and perhaps a thing like that would to too much 
for other people too, for instance for the landlord. By 
the time he was done with the second interrogation he 



THE CASTLE 


349 

had really been walking in a sort of swoon. It had been 
almost like being drunk ; after all, he had seen and 
heard the two gentlemen for the first time and had also 
had to answer their questions, into^the bargain. Every- 
thing, so far as he knew, had worked out pretty well, 
but then that misfortune had occurred, which, after what 
had gone before, he could scarcely be blamed for. 
Unfortunately only Erlanger aiid Biirgel had realised 
what a condition he was in and they would certainly have 
looked after him and so prevented all the rest, but 
Erlanger had had to go away immediately after the 
interrogation, evidently in order to drive up to the 
Castle, and Biirgel, probably himself tired after that 
interrogation— and how then should K. have been able 
to come out of it with his strength unimpaired ?— had 
gone to sleep and had indeed slept through the whole 
distribution of files. If K. had had a similar chance he 
would have been delighted to take it and would gladly 
have done without all the prohibited insight into what 
was going on there, and this all the more lightheartedly 
since in reality he had been quite incapable of seeing 
anything, for which reason even the most sensitive 
gentlemen could have shown themselves before him 
without embarrassment. 

The mention of the two interrogations— particularly of 
that with Erlanger— and the respect with which K. spoke 
of the gentlemen inclined the landlord favourably 
towards him. He seemed to be prepared to grant K.’s 
reqi^est to be allowed to lay a board across the barrels 
and sleep there at least till dawm, but the landlady was 
markedly against it, twitching ineffectively here and 
there at her dress, the slovenly state of which she seemed 
only now to have noticed, she kept on shaking her head ; 
a quarrel obviously of long standing with regard to the 



THE CASTLE 


350 

orderliness of the house was on the point of breaking out 
afresh. For K. in his fatigued state the talk between 
the couple took on exaggeratedly great significance. To 
be driven out from. here again seemed to him to be a 
misfortune surpassing all that had happened to him 
hitherto. This must not be allowed to happen, even if 
the landlord and the landlady should unite against him. 
Crumpled up on the ba*rel, he looked in eager expectance 
at the two of them until the landlady, with her abnormal 
touchiness, which had long ago struck suddenly 
stepped aside and — probably she had by now been 
discussing other things with the landlord — exclaimed : 
“ How he stares at me ! Do send him away now ! 
But K., seizing the opportunity and now utterly, almost 
to the point of indifference, convinced that he would 
stay, said : “ Tm not looking at you, only at your dress.'* 
** Why my dress ? '' the landlady asked agitatedly. 
K. shrugged his shoulders. ** Come on J '' the landlady 
said to the landlord. ** Don't you see he's drunk, the 
lout? Leave him here to sleep it off! " and she even 
ordered Pepi, who on being called by her emerged out of 
the dark, towsled, tired, idly holding a broom in her 
hand, to throw K. some sort of a cushion. 


XX 

W HEN K. woke up he at first thought he had hardly 
slept at all ; the room was as empty and warm 
as before, all the walls in darkness, the one bulb over 
the beer-taps extinguished, and outside the windows was 
the night. But when he stretched, and the cushion fell 
down and the bed and the barrels creaked, Pepi instantly 



THE CASTLE 


351 

appeared, and now he learnt that it was already evening 
and that he had slept for well over twelve hours. The 
landlady had asked after him several times during the 
day, and so had Gerstacker, who had been waiting here 
in the dark, by the beer, while K. had been talking to the 
landlady in the morning, but then he had not dared to 
disturb K., had been here once in the meantime to see 
how K. was getting on, and finally, so at least it was 
alleged, Frieda had also come and had stood for a moment 
beside K., yet she had scarcely come on K/s account, but 
because she had had various things to make ready here, 
for in the evening she was to resume her old duties 
after all. ** I suppose she doesn’t like you any more ? 
Pepi asked, bringing coffee and cakes. But she no 
longer asked it maliciously, in her old way, but sadly, 
as though in the meantime she had come to know the 
malice of the world, compared with which all one’s own 
malice fails and becomes senseless ; she spoke to K. as 
to a fellow sufferer, and when he tasted the coffee and 
she thought she saw that it was not sweet enough for 
him, she ran and brought him the full sugar-bowl. 
Her sadness had, indeed, not prevented her from tricking 
herself out to-day if anything even more than the last 
time ; she wore an abundance of bows and ribbons 
plaited into her hair, along her forehead and on her 
temples the hair had been carefully curled with the tongs, 
and round her neck she had a little chain that hung down 
into the low-cut opening of her blouse. When, in his 
confentment at having at last slept his fill and now being 
permitted to drink a good cup of coffee, K. furtively 
stretched his hand out towards one of the bows and tried 
to untie it, Pepi said wearily : Do leave me alone,” 

and sat down beside him on a barrel. And K. did not 
even need to ask her what was the matter, she at once 



THE CASTLE 


352 

began telling the story herself, rigidly staring into K/s 
coffee-mug, as though she needed some distraction, even 
while she was talking, as though she could not quite 
abandon herself to ^ her suffering even when she was 
discussing it, as that would be beyond her powers. 
First of dl K, learnt that actually he was to blame for 
Pepi's misfortunes, but that she did not bear him any 
grudge. And she nodded eagerly as she talked, in order 
to prevent K. from raising any objection. First he had 
taken Frieda away from the tap-room and thus made 
Pepi’s rise possible. There was nothing else that could 
be imagined that could have brought Frieda to give up 
her situation, she sat tight there in the tap-room like a 
spider in its web, with all the threads under her control, 
threads of which no one knew but she ; it would have 
been quite impossible to winkle her out against her will, 
only love for some lowly person, that is to say, something 
that was not in keeping with her position, could drive 
her from her place. And Pepi ? Had she ever thought of 
getting the situation for herself ? She was a chambermaid, 
she had an insignificant situation with few prospects, she 
had dreams of a great future like any other girl, one can't 
stop oneself from having dreams, but she had never 
seriously thought of getting on in the world, she had 
resigned herself to staying in the job she had. And now 
Frieda suddenly vanished from the tap-room, it had 
haf>pened so suddenly that the landlord had not had a 
suitable substitute on hand at the moment, he had 
looked round and his glance had fallen on Pepi, who^h^d, 
admittedly, pushed herself forward in such a way as to 
be noticed. At that time she had loved K. as she had 
never loved anyone before ; month after month she had 
been down there in her tiny dark room, prepared to spend 
years there, or, if the worst came to the worst, to spend 



THE CASTLE 


353 

her whole life here, ignored by everyone, and now 
suddenly K. had appeared, a hero, a rescuer of maidens 
in distress, and had opened up the way upstairs for her. 
Admittedly he did not know anything about her, he 
had not done it for her sake, but rfiat did not diminish 
her gratitude, in the night preceding her appointment — 
the appointment was not yet definite, but still, it was 
now veiy probable — she spent Jiours talking to him, 
whispering her thanks in his ear. And in her eyes it 
exalted what he had done still more that it should have 
been Frieda, of all people, with whom he had burdened 
himself ; there was something incomprehensibly selfless 
in his making Frieda his mistress in order to pave the 
way for Pepi — Frieda, a plain, oldish, skinny girl with 
short, thin hair, a deceitful girl, into the bargain, always 
having some sort of secrets, which was probably con- 
nected, after all, with her appearance ; if her wretched- 
ness was glaringly obvious in her face and figure, she 
must at least have other secrets that nobody could 
enquire into, for instance her alleged afiair with Klamm. 
And even thoughts like the following had occurred to 
Pepi at that time : is it possible that K. really loves 
Frieda, isn't he deceiving himself or is he perhaps 
deceiving only Frieda, and will perhaps the sole outcome 
of the whole thing after all be nothing but Pepi’s rise 
in the world, and will K. then notice the mistake, or not 
want to cover it up any more, and no longer see Frieda, 
but only Pepi, which need not even be a crazy piece of 
conceit on Pepi's part, for so far as Frieda was concerned 
sheVas a match for her, one girl against another, which 
nobody would deny, and it had, after all, been primarily 
Frieda's position and the glory that Frieda had been able 
to invest it with that had dazzled K. at the moment. 
And so then Pepi had dreamed that when she had the 
12 



THE CASTLE 


354 

position K. would come to her, pleading, and she would 
then have the choice of either granting K/s plea and 
losing her situation or of rejecting him and rising further. 
And she had worked out for herself that she would 
renounce everything Und lower herself to him and teach 
him what true love was, which he would never be able 
to learn from Frieda and which was independent of all 
positions of honour in ^he world. But then everything 
turned out differently. And what was to blame for 
this? Above all, K., and then, of cou»3e, Frieda's 
artfulness. Above all, K. For what was he after, what 
sort of strange person was he ? What was he trying to 
get, what were these important things that kept him busy 
and made him forget what was nearest of all, best of all, 
most beautiful of all ? Pepi was the sacrifice and every- 
thing was stupid and everyThing was lost ; and anyone 
who had the strength to set fire to the whole Herrenhof 
and burn it down, burn it to the ground, so that not a 
trace of it was left, burn it up like a piece of paper in 
the stove, he would to-day be Pepi's chosen love. Well, 
so Pepi came into the tap-room, four days ago to-day, 
shortly before lunch-time. The work here was far 
from easy, it was almost killingly hard work, but there 
was a good deal to be got out of it too. Even previously 
Pepi had not lived only for the day, and even if she 
would never have aspired to this situation even in her 
wildest dreams, still, she had made plenty of observa- 
tions, she knew what this situation involved, she had 
not taken on the situation without being prepared. 
One could not take it on without being prepaiod, 
otherwise one lost it in the first few hours. Particularly 
if one were to behave here the way the chamber-maids 
did ! As a chamber-maid one did in time come to feel 
one was quite lost and forgotten ; it was like working 



THE CASTLE 


355 

down a mine, at least that was the way it was in the 
secretaries’ passage, for days on end there ; except for a 
few daytime applicants who flitted in and out without 
daring to look up one didn’t see a soul but two or three 
other chamber-maids, and they were just as embittered. 
In the morning one wasn't allowed to leave the room at 
all, that was when the secretaries wished to be alone 
among themselves, their meals^ were brought to them 
from the kitchen by the men-servants, the chamber- 
maids ususdly had nothing to do with that, and during 
meal-times, too, one was not allowed to show oneself 
in the passage. It was only while the gentlemen were 
working that the chamber-maids were allowed to do the 
rooms, but naturally not those that were occupied, only 
those that happened to be empty at the time, and the 
work had to be done quite quietly so that the gendemen 
were not disturbed at their work. But how was it 
possible to do the cleaning quietly when the gentlemen 
occupied their rooms for several days on end, and the 
men-servants, dirty lot that they were, pottered about 
there into the bargain, and when the chamber-maid was 
finally allowed to go into the room, it was in such a state 
that not even the Flood could wash it clean? Truly, 
they were exalted gentlemen, but one had to make a 
great eflFort to overcome one's disgust so as to be able 
to clean up after them. It wasn’t that the chamber- 
maids had such a great amount of work, but it was 
pretty tough. And never a kind word, never anything 
but reproaches, in particularly the following, which was 
the most tormenting and the most frequent : tliat files 
had got lost during the doing of the rooms. In reality 
nothing ever got lost, every scrap of paper was handed 
over to the landlord, but in fact of course files did get 
lost, only it happened not to be the fault of the maids. 



THE CASTLE 


356 

And then commissions came, and the maids had to leave 
their room, and the members of commission rummaged 
through the beds, the girls had no possessions, of course, 
their few things could be put in a basket, but still, the 
commission searched for hours all the same. Naturally 
they found nothing. How should files come to be 
there ? What did the maids care about files ? But the 
outcome was always the same^ abuse and threats uttered 
by the disappointed commission and passed on by the 
landlord. And never any peace, neither by day nor by 
night, noise going on half through the night and noise 
again at the crack of dawn. If at least one didn't have 
to live in, but one had to, for it was the chamber-nuids' 
job to bring snacks from the kitchen as they might be 
ordered, in between rimes, particularly at night. Always 
suddenly the fist thumping on the chamber-maids' door, 
the order being dictated, the running down to the 
kitchen, shaking the sleeping scullery-lads, the setting 
down of the tray with the things ordered outside the 
chamber-maids' door, from where the men-servants 
fetched it — how sad all that was. But that was not the 
worst. The worst was when no order came, that was to 
say, when, at dead of night, when everyone ought to be 
asleep and most of them really were asleep at last, 
sometimes a tiptoeing around began outside the chamber- 
maids' door. Then the girls got out of bed — the bunks 
were on top of each other, for there was very little space 
there, the whole room the maids had being actually 
nothing more than a large cupboard with three shelves in 
it — listened at the door, knelt down, put their aitus 
round each other in fear. And whoever was tiptoeing 
outside the door could be heard all the time. They 
would all be thankful if only he would come right in 
and be done with it, but nothing happened, nobody 



THE CASTLE 


357 

came in. And at the same time one had to admit to 
oneself that it need not necessarily be some danger 
threatening, perhaps it was only someone walking up and 
down outside the door, trying to, make up his mind to 
order something, and then not being able to bring himself 
to it after all. Perhaps that was all it was, but perhaps 
it was something quite different. For really one didn't 
know the gentlemen at all, ont had hardly set eyes on 
them. Aiyway, inside the room the maids were fainting 
in terror, and when at last it was quiet again outside they 
leant against the wall and had not enough strength left 
to get back into bed. This was the life that was waiting 
for Pepi to return to it, this very evening she w^as to 
move back to her place in the maids’ room. And why ? 
Because of K. and Frieda. Back again into that life she 
had scarcely escaped from, which she escaped from, it is 
true, with K.'s help, but also, of course, through very 
great exertions of her own. For in that service there the 
girls neglected themselves, even those who were other- 
wise the most careful and tidy. For whom should they 
smarten themselves ? Nobody saw them, at best the 
staff in the kitchen ; anyone for whom that was enough 
was welcome to smarten herself. But for the rest they 
were always in their little room or in the gentlemen’s 
rooms, which it was madness and a waste so much as to 
set foot in with clean clothes on. And always by 
artificial light and in that stuffy air — with the heating 
always on — and actually always tired. The one free 
afternoon in the week was best spent sleeping quietly 
and without fear in one of the cubby-holes in the kitchen. 
So what should one smarten oneself up for ? Yes, one 
scarcely bothered to dress at all. And now Pepi had 
suddenly been transferred to the tap-room, where, if one 
wanted to maintain one’s position there, exactly the 



THE CASTLE 


358 

opposite was necessary, where one was always in full view 
of people, and among them very observant gentlemen, 
used to the best of everything, and where one therefore 
always had to look a^s smart and pleasant as possible. 
Well, that was a change. And Pepi could say of herself 
that she had not failed to rise to the occasion. Pepi was 
not worrying about how things would turn out later. 
She knew she had the abilities necessary in this situation, 
she was quite certain of it, she had this conviction even 
now and nobody could take it away from her, not even 
to-day, on the day of her defeat. The only difficulty was 
how she was to stand the test in the very beginning, 
because she was, after all, only a poor chamber-maid, with 
nothing to wear and no jewellery, and because the gentle- 
men had not the patience to wait and see how one would 
develop, but instantly, without transition, wanted a 
bar-maid of the proper kind, or else they turned away. 
One would think they didn't expect so very much since, 
after all, Frieda could satisfy them. But that was not 
right, Pepi had often thought about this, she had, after 
all, often been together with Frieda and had for a time 
even slept together with her. It wasn't easy to find 
Frieda out, and anyone who was not very much on the 
look-out — and which of the gentlemen was very much 
on the look-out, after all ? — was at once misled by her. 
No one knew better than Frieda herself how miserable 
her looks were, for instance when one saw her for the 
first time with her hair down, one clasped one's hands in 
pity, by rights a girl like that shouldn't even b^ a 
chamber-maid ; and she knew it, too, and many a nigfit 
she had spent crying about it, pressing tight against 
Pepi and laying Pepi’s hair round her own head. But 
when she was on duty all her doubts vanished, she 
thought herself better-looking than anyone, and she had 



THE CASTLE 


35Q 

rhc knack of getting everyone to think the same. She 
knew what people were like, and really that was where 
her art lay. And she was quick with a lie, and cheated, 
so that people didn't have time to get a closer look at her. 
Naturally that wouldn't do in the*long run, people had 
eyes in their heads and sooner or later their eyes would 
tell them what to think. But the moment she noticed 
the danger of that she was ready with another method, 
recently, for instance, her affair with Klamm. Her 
affair with fClamm ! If you don't believe it, you can go 
and get proof ; go to Klamm and ask him. How 
cunning, how cunning. And if you don't happen to 
dare to go to Klamm with an enquiry like that, and 
perhaps wouldn't be admitted to him with infinitely 
more important enquiries, and Klamm is, in fact, 
completely inaccessible to you — only to you and your 
sort, for Frieda, for instance, pops in to see him whenever 
she likes — if that's how it is, you can still get proof of 
the thing, you only need to wait. After all, Klamm won't 
be able to tejerate such a false rumour for long, he's 
certain to be very keen to know what stories go round 
about him in the tap-room and in the public rooms, all 
this is of the greatest importance to him, and if it's 
wrong he will refute it at once. But he doesn't refute it ; 
well, then there is nothing to be refuted and it is sheer 
truth. What one sees, indeed, is only that Frieda takes 
the beer into Klamm's room and comes out again with 
the money ; but what one doesn’t see Frieda tells one 
about, and one has to believe her. And she doesn't even 
teH^it, after all, she’s not going to let such secrets out ; 
no, the secrets let themselves out wherever she goes and, 
since they have been let out once and for all, she herself, 
it is true, no longer shrinks from talking about them 
herself, but modestly, without asserting anything, only 



THE CASTLE 


360 

referring to what is generally known anyway. Not to 
everything. One thing, for instance, she docs not speak 
of, namely that since she has been in the tap-room 
Klamm drinks less beer than formerly, not much less, 
but still perceptibly less beer, and there may indeed be 
various reasons for this, it may be that a period has come 
when Klamm has less taste for beer or that it is Frieda 
who causes him to forget about beer-drinking. Anyway, 
however amazing it may be, Frieda is Klamm's mistress. 
But how should the others not also admire what is good 
enough for Klamm ? And so, before anyone knows what 
is happening, Frieda has turned into a great beauty, a girl 
of exactly the kind that the tap-room needs ; indeed, 
almost too beautiful, too powerful, even now the tap- 
room is hardly good enough for her any more. And, in 
fact, it does strike people as odd that she is still in the 
tap-room ; being a bar-maid is a great deal, and from 
that point of view the liaison with Klamm seems very 
credible, but if the tap-room girl has once become 
Klamm's mistress, why docs he leave her in the tap-room, 
and so long ? Why docs he not take her up higher ? 
One can tell people a thousand times that there is no 
contradiction here, that Klamm has definite reasons for 
acting as he does, or that some day, perhaps even at any 
moment now, Frieda's elevation will suddenly come 
about ; all this does not make much impression ; people 
have definite notions and in the long run will not let 
themselves be distracted from them by any talk, how- 
ever ingenious. Nobody any longer doubted that Frieda 
was Klamm's mistress, even those who obviously kpew 
better were by now too tired to doubt it. ‘ Be Klamm's 
mistress, and to hell with it,' they thought, * but if 
you are, we want to see signs of it in your getting on, too.' 
But one saw no signs of it, and Frieda stayed in the 



THE CASTLE 


?6i 

tap-room as before and secretly was thoroughly glad 
that things remained the way they were. But she lost 
prestige with people, that, of course, she could not fail 
to notice, indeed she usually noticed things even before 
they existed. A really beautiful, fovablc girl, once she 
has settled down in the tap-room, does not need to 
display any arts ,* as long as she is beautiful, she will 
remain tap-room maid, unless spme particularly unfor- 
tunate accident occurs. But a girl like Frieda must be 
continually*worried about her situation, naturally she has 
enough sense not to show it, on the contrar)^ she is in 
the habit of complaining and cursing the situation. 
But in secret she keeps a weather-eye open all the time. 
And so she saw how people were becoming indiflerent, 
Frieda’s appearance on the scene was no longer anything 
that made it worth anyone’s while even to glance up, 
not even the men-servants bothered about her any more, 
they had enough sense to stick to Olga and girls of that 
sort, from the landlord’s behaviour, too, she noticed 
that she was becoming less and less indispensable, one 
could not go on for ever inventing new stories about 
Klamm, everything has its limits, and so dear Frieda 
decided to try something new. If anyone had only been 
capable of seeing through it immediately ! Pcpi had 
sensed it, but unfortunately she had not seen through it. 
Frieda decided to cause a scandal, she, Klamm’s mistress, 
throws herself away on the first comer, if possible on the 
lowest of the low. That will make a stir, that will keep 
people talking for a long time, and at last, at last, people 
wd^ remember what it means to be Klamm’s mistress and 
what it means to throw away this honour in the rapture 
of a new love. The only difficulty was to find the 
suitable man with whom the clever game could be 
played. It must not be an acquaintance of Frieda's, 



THE CASTLE 


362 

not even one of the men-servants, for he would probably 
have looked at her askance and have walked on, above 
all he would not have remained serious enough about it 
and for all her ready tqngue it would have been impossible 
to spread the story that she, Frieda, had been attacked 
by him, had not been able to defend herself against him 
and in an hour when she did not know what she was 
doing had submitted to iiim. And although it had to be 
one of the lowest of the low, it nevertheless^ had to be 
one of whom it could be made credible that in spite of 
his crude, coarse nature he longed for nobody but Frieda 
herself and had no loftier desire than — heavens above I — 
to marry Frieda, But although it had to be a common 
man, if possible even lower than a servant, much lower 
than a servant, yet it must be one on whose account one 
would not be laughed to scorn by every girl, one in 
whom another girl, a girl of sound judgment, might also 
at some time find something attractive. But where does 
one find such a man ? Another girl would probably have 
spent her whole life looking for him. Frieda^s luck 
brought the Land Surveyor into the tap-room to her, 
perhaps on the very evening when the plan had come 
into her mind for the first time. The Land Surveyor ! 
Yes, what was K. thinking of? What special things 
had he in mind ? Was he going to achieve something 
special ? A good appointment, a distinction ? Was he 
after something of that sort ? Well, then he ought to 
have set about things differently from the very beginning. 
After all, he was a nonentity, it was heart-rending to, ye 
his situation. He was a Land Surveyor, that was 
perhaps something, so he had learnt something, but if 
one didn't know what to do with it, then again it was 
nothing after all. And at the same time he made 
demands, without having the slightest backing, made 



THE CASTLE 


363 

demands not outright, but one noticed that he was 
making some sort of demands, and that was. after all. 
infuriating. Did he know that even a chamber-maid was 
lowering herself if she talked to h^m for any length of 
time ? And with all these special demands he rumbled 
headlong into the most obvious trap on the very first 
evening. Wasn*t he ashamed of himself? What was it 
about Frieda that he found so •alluring? Could she 
really appeal to him, that skinny, sallow thing ? Ah no, 
he didn't even look at her, she only had to tell him she 
was Klamm's mistress, for him that was still a novelty, 
and so he was lost ! But now she had to move out, now, 
of course, there was no longer any room for her in the 
Herrenhof. Pepi saw her the very same morning before 
she moved out, the staff all came running up, after all, 
everyone was curious to see the sight. And so great was 
her power even then that she was pitied, she was pitied 
by everyone, even by her enemies ; so correct did her 
calculations prove to be from the very start ; having 
thrown herself away on such a man seemed incomprehen- 
sible to everyone and a blow of fate, the little kitchen- 
maids, who, of course, admire every bar-maid, were 
inconsolable. Even Pepi was touched, not even she 
could remain quite unmoved, even though her attention 
was actually focussed on something else. She was struck 
by how little sad Frieda actually was. After all it was 
at bottom a dreadful misfortune that had come upon her, 
and indeed she was behaving as though she were very 
unhaj)py, but it was not enough, this acting could not 
deceive Pepi. So what was it that was keeping her 
going ? Perhaps the happiness of her new love ? Well, 
this possibility could not be considered. But what else 
could it be ? What gave her the strength to be as coolly 
pleasant as ever even to Pepi, who was already regarded 



THE CASTLE 


364 

as her successor? Pepi had not then had the time to 
think about it, she had had too much to do getting ready 
for the new job. She was probably to start on the job < 
in a few hours and spll had not had her hair done nicely, 
had no smart dress, no fine underclothes, no decent 
shoes. All this had to be procured in a few hours ; if 
one could not equip oneself properly, then it was better 
to give up all thought S^f the situation, for then one was 
sure of losing it in the very first half-hour. Well, she 
succeeded partly. She had a special gift for fiair-dressing, 
once, indeed, the landlady had sent for her to do her hair, 
it was a matter of having a specially light hand, and she 
had it, of course, her abundant hair was the sort you 
could do anything you like with. There was help 
forthcoming in ihe matter of the dress too. Her two 
colleagues kept faith with her, it was after all a sort of 
honour for them, too, if a girl out of their own group 
was chosen to be bar-maid, and then later on, when she 
had come to power, Pepi would have been able to provide 
them with many advantages. One of the girls had for a 
long time been keeping some expensive material, it was 
her treasure, she had often let the others admire it, j 
doubtless dreaming of how some day she would make 
magnificent use of it and — this had been really very nice ^ 
of her — now, when Pepi needed it, she sacrificed it. 
And both girls had very willingly helped her with the 
sewing, if they had been sewing it for themselves they 
could not have been keener. That was indeed a very 
merr)^ happy job of work. They sat, each on her bunk, 
one over the other, sew'ing and singing, and handed 
each other the finished parts and the accessories, up and 
down. When Pepi thought of it, it made her heart ever 
heavier to think that it was all in vain and chat she was 
going back to her friends with empty hands ! What 



THE CASTLE 


365 

a misfortune and how frivolously brought about* above 
all by K. I How pleased they had all been with the 
dress at that time, it seemed a pledge of success and when 
at the last moment it turned out that there was still 
room for another ribbon, the last d6ubt vanished. And 
was it not really beautiful, this dress ? It was crumpled 
now and showed some spots, the fact was, Pepi had no 
second dress, had to wear this 0115 day and night, but it 
could still be seen how beautiful it was, not even that 
accursed Ba»nabas woman could produce a better one. 
And that one could pull it tight and loosen it again as 
one liked, on top and at the bottom, so that although it 
was only one dress, it was so changeable — this was a 
particular advantage and was actually her invention. Of 
course it wasn't difficult to make clothes for her, Pepi 
didn't boast of it, there it was — everything suited young, 
healthy girls. It was much harder to get liold of under- 
clothing and boots, and here was where the failure 
actually began. Here, too, her girl friends helped our 
as best they could, but they could not do much. It was, 
after all, only coarse underclothing that they got together 
and patched up, and instead of high-heeled little boots 
she had to make do with slippers, of a kind one would 
rather hide than show. They comforted Pepi : after all, 
hrieda was not dressed so very beautifully either, and 
sometimes she went round looking so sluttish that the 
guests preferred to be served by the cellarmen rather 
than by her. This was in fact so, but Frieda could afford 
to do that, she already enjoyed favour and prestige ; 
vvh*it a lady for once makes an appearance looking 
besmirched and carelessly dressed, that is all the more 
alluring — but in the case of a novice like Pepi ? And 
besides, Frieda could not dress well at all, she was simply 
devoid of all taste ; if a person happened to have a 



THE CASTLE 


566 

sallow skin, then, of course, she must put up with it, 
but she needn't go around, like. Frieda, wearing a low-cut 
cream blouse to go with it, so that one's eyes were dazzled 
by all that yellow. And even if it hadn't been for that, 
she was too mean t6 dress well ; everything she earned, 
she hung on to, nobody knew what for. She didn't need 
any money in her job, she managed by means of lying 
and trickery, this was^an example Pepi did not want to 
and could not imitate, and that was why it was justifiable 
that she should smarten herself up like this in order to 
get herself thoroughly noticed right at the beginning. 
Had she only been able to do it by stronger means, she 
would, in spite of all Frieda's cunning, in spite of all K.'s 
foolishness, have been victorious. After all, it started 
very well. The few tricks of the trade and things it was 
necessary to know she had found out about well before- 
hand. She was no sooner in the tap-room than she was 
thoroughly at home there. Nobody missed Frieda at the 
job. It was only on the second day that some guests 
enquired what had become of Frieda. No mistake was 
made, the landlord was satisfied, on the first day he had 
been so anxious that he spent all the time in the tap- 
room, later he only came in now and then, finally, since 
the money in the till was correct — the takings were on 
the average even a little higher than in Frieda's time — he 
left everything to Pepi. She introduced innovations. 
Frieda had even supervised the men-servants, at least 
partly, particularly when anyone was looking, and this 
not out of keenness on the work, but out of meanness, 
out of a desire to dominate, out of fear of letting ailj^onc 
else invade her rights, Pepi on the other hand allotted 
this job entirely to the cellarmcn, who, after all, are 
much better at it. In this way she had more time left 
for the private rooms, the guests got quick sen^ice ; 



THE CASTLE 


367 

nevertheless she was able to chat for a moment with 
everyone, not like Frieda, who allegedly reserved herself 
entirely for Klamm and regarded every word, every 
approach, on the part of anyone else as an insult to 
Klamm. This was, of course, quite clever of her, for, if 
for once she did allow anyone to get near her, it was an 
unheard-of favour. Pepi, however, hated such arts, and 
anyway they were no use at tly beginning. Pepi was 
kind to everyone and every^one requited her with kindness. 
All were visibly glad of the change ; when the gentlemen, 
tired after their work, were at last free to sit down to 
their beer for a little while, one could positively transform 
them by a word, by a glance, by a shrug of the shoulders. 
So eagerly did all hands stroke Pepi’s curls that she had 
to do her hair again quite ten times a day, no one could 
resist the temptation offered by these curls and bows, 
not even K., who was otherwise so absent-minded. So 
exciting days flew past, full of work, but successful. If 
only they had not flown past so quickly, if only there 
had been a little more of them ! Four days were too 
little even if one exerted oneself to the point of exhaustion, 
perhaps the fifth day would have been enough, but four 
days were too little. Pepi had, admittedly, gained well- 
wishers and friends even in four days, if she had been 
able to trust all the glances she caught, when she came 
along with the beer-mugs, she positively swam in a sea of 
friendliness, a clerk by the name of Bartmeier was crazy 
about her, gave her this little chain and locket, putting 
his picture into the locket, which was, of course, brazen 
ofiibim ; this and other things had happened, but it had 
only been four days, in four days, if Pepi set about it, 
Frieda could be almost, but still not quite, forgotten ; 
and yet she would have been forgotten, perhaps even 
sooner, had she not seen to it by means of her great 



THE CASTLE 


368 

scandal that she kept herself talked about, in this way 
she had become new to people, they might have liked to 
sec her again simply for the sake of curiosity ; what they 
had come to find boring to the point of disgust had, and 
this was the doing of the otherwise entirely uninteresting 
K., come to have charm for them again, of course they 
would not have given up Pepi as long as she was there 
in front of them and exerting influence by her presence, 
but they were mostly^ elderly gentlemen, slow and 
heavy in their habits, it took some time for them to 
get used to a new bar-maid, and however acivantageous 
the exchange might be, it still took a few days, took 
a few days against the gentlemen's own will, only five 
days perhaps, but four days were not enough, in spite of 
everything Pepi still counted only as the temporary 
bar-maid. And then what was perhaps the greatest 
misfortune : in these four days, although he had been 
in the village during the first two, Klamm did not come 
down into the saloon. Had he come, that would have 
been Pepi's most decisive test, a test, incidentally, that 
she was least afraid of, one to which she was more 
inclined to look forward. She would — though it is, of 
course, best not to touch on such things in words at all — 
not have become Klamm's mistress, nor would she have 
promoted herself to that position by telling lies, but she 
would have been able to put the beer-glass on the table 
at least as nicely as Frieda, have said good-day and goodbye 
prettily without Frieda's officiousness, and if Klamm did 
look for anything in any girl's eyes at all, he would have 
found it to his entire satisfaction in Pepi's eyes. But 
why did he not come ? Was it chance ? That was vuhat 
Pepi had thought at the time, too. All those two days 
she had expected him at any moment, and in the night 
she waited too. ‘ Now Klamm is coming,' she kept 



THE CASTLE 


569 

1)11 thinking, and dashed to and fro for no other reason 
than the restlessness of expectation and the desire to be 
the first to see him, immediately on his entry* This 
continual disappointment made her very tired ; pcrliaps 
that was why she did not get so n^uch as she could have 
got done. Whenever she had a little time she crept up 
into the passage that the staff was strictly forbidden to 
enter, there she would squeeze into a recess and wait. 
' If only Klamm would come ^ow,' she thought, ' if 
only I could take the gentleman out of his room and carry 
him down into the saloon on my arms. I should not 
collapse under that burden, however great it might be.' 
But he did not come. In that passage upstairs it was so 
quiet that one simply couldn't imagine it if one hadn't 
been there. It was so quiet that one couldn't stand 
being there for very long, the quietness drove one away. 
But over and over again : driven away ten rimes, ten 
times again Pepi went up there. It was senseless, of 
course. If Klamm wanted to come, he would come, but 
if he did not want to come, Pepi would not lure him 
out, even if the beating of her heart half suflocated her 
there in the recess. It was senseless, but if he did not 
come, almost everything was senseless. And he did not 
come. To-day Pepi knew why Klamm did not come, 
Frieda would have found it wonderfully amusing if she 
had been able to see Pepi up there in the passage, in the 
recess, both hands on her heart. Klamm did not come 
down because Frieda did not allow it. It was not by 
means of her pleading that she brought this about, her 
pleading did not penetrate to Klamm. But — spider that 
sliQ was — she had connections of which nobody knew. If 
Pepi said something to a guest, she said it openly, the 
next table could hear it too. Frieda had nothing to say, 
she put the beer on the table and went ; there was only 



THE CASTLE 


?70 

the rustling of her silk petticoat, the only thing on which 
she spent money. But if she did for once say something, 
then not openly, then she whispered it to the guest, 
bending low so that people at the next table pricked up 
their ears. What she laid was probably quite trivial, but 
still, not always, she had connections, she supported the 
ones by means of the others, and if most of them failed- - 
who would keep on bothering about Frieda ? — still, here 
and there one did hold hrm. These connections she now 
began to exploit. K. gave her the chance to do this ; 
instead of sitting with her and keeping a watch on her, 
he hardly stayed at home at all, wandering, having 
discussions here and there, paying attention to everything, 
only not to Frieda, and finally, in order to give her still 
more freedom, he moved out of the Bridge Inn into the 
empty school. A very nice beginning for a honeymoon 
all this was. Well, Pepi was certainly the last person to 
reproach K. for not having been able to stand living with 
Frieda ; nobody coulJ stand living with her. But why 
then did he not leave her entirely, why did he time and 
again return to her, why did he cause tlie impression, by 
his roaming about, that he was fighting for her cause ? 
It really looked as though it were only through his 
contact with Frieda that he had discovered what a 
nonentity he in fact was, that he wished to make himself 
worthy of Frieda, wished to make his way up somehow, 
and for that reason was for the time being sacrificing her 
company in order to be able later to compensate himself 
at leisure for these hardships. Meanwhile Frieda was 
not wasting her time, she sat tight in the school, whare 
she had probably led K., and kept the Herrenhof and K. 
under observation. She had excellent messengers at her 
disposal : K.*s assistants, whom — one couldn't under- 
stand it, even if one knew K. one couldn't understand 



THE CASTLE 


371 

it— K. left entirely to hen She sent them to her old 
friends, reminded people of her existence, complained 
that she was kept a prisoner by a man like K., incited 
people against Pepi, announced her imminent arrival, 
begged for help, implored them* to betray nothing to 
Klamm, behaved as if Klamm's feelings had to be 
spared and as if for this reason he must on no account be 
allowed to come down into tap-room. What she 
represented to one as a way of sparing Klamm’s feelings 
she succe:fcfully turned to account where the landlord 
was concerned, drawing attention to the fact that Klamm 
did not come any more. How could he come when 
downstairs there was only a Pepi serving ? True, it 
wasn't the landlord's fault, this Pepi was after all the 
best substitute that could be found, only the substitute 
wasn't good enough, not even for a few days. All this 
activity of Frieda's was something of which K. knew 
nothing, when he was not roaming about he was lying 
at her feet, without an inkling of it, while she counted 
the hours still keeping her from the tap-room. But this 
running of errands was not the only thing the assistants 
did, they also served to make K. jealous, to keep him 
interested I Frieda had known the assistants since her 
childhood, they certainly had no secrets from each other 
now, but in K.'s honour they were beginning to have a 
yearning for each other, and for K. there arose the danger 
that it would turn out to be a great love. And K. did 
everything Frieda wanted, even what was contradictory 
and senseless, he let himself be made jealous by the 
a^iistants, at the same time allowing all three to remain 
together while he went on his wanderings alone. It was 
almost as though he were Frieda's third assistant. And 
so, on the basis of her observations, Frieda at last decided 
to make her great coup : she made up her mind to return. 



THE CASTLE 


372 

And it was really high time, it was admirable how Frieda, 
the cunning aeature, recognised and exploited this fact ; 
this power of observation and this power of decision 
were Frieda’s inimitable art ; if Pepi had it, how 
different the course of 'her life would be. If Frieda had 
stayed one or two days longer in the school, it would no 
longer be possible to drive Pepi out, §he would be bar- 
maid once and for all, loyed and supported by all, having 
earned enough money to replenish her scanty wardrobe in 
the most dazzling style, only one or two more» days and 
Klamm could not be kept out of the saloon by any 
intrigues any longer, would come, drink, feel comfortable 
and, if he noticed Frieda’s absence at all, would be 
highly satisfied with the change, only one or two more 
days and Frieda, with her scandal, with her connections, 
with the assistants, with everything, would be utterly 
and completely forgotten, never would she come out 
into the open again. Then perhaps she would be able to 
cling all the more tightly to K. and, assuming that she 
were capable of it, would really learn to love him ? No, 
not that either. For it didn't take even K. more than one 
day to get tired of her, to recognise how infamously she 
was deceiving him, with everything, with her alleged 
beauty, her alleged constancy, and most of all with 
Klamm's alleged love, it would only take him one day 
more, and no longer, to chase her out of the house, and 
together with her the whole dirty set-up with the 
assistants ; just think, it wouldn't take even K. any 
longer than that. And now, between these two dangers, 
when the grave was positively beginning to close o\*sr 
her — K. in his simplicity was still keeping the last 
narrow road open for her — she suddenly bolted. Sud- 
denly — hardly anyone expected such a thing, it was 
against nature — suddenly it was she who drove away K., 



THE CASTLE 


^ 7 ? 

the man who still loved her and kept on pursuinjj her, 
and, aided by the pressure of her friends and the assistants, 
appeared to the landlord as the rescuer, as a result of the 
scandal associated with her much more alluring than 
formerly, demonstrably desired by the lowest as by the 
highest, yet having fallen a prey to the lowest only for a 
moment, soon rejecting him as w^as proper, and again 
inaccessible to him and to all (fthers, as formerly ; only 
that formerly all this was quite properly doubted, 
whereas how everyone was again convinced. So she 
came back, the landlord, with a sidelong glance at Pepi, 
hesitated — should he sacrifice her, after she had proved 
her worth so well ? — but he was soon talked over, there 
was too much to be said for Frieda, and above all, of 
course, she would bring Klamm back to the saloon acjnin. 
That is where we stand, this evening. Pepi is not going 
to wait till Frieda comes and makes a triumph out of 
taking over the job. She has already handed over the till 
to the landlady, she can go now. The bunk downstairs 
in the maids’ room is waiting for her, she will come m, 
welcomed by the weeping girls, her friends, will rear 
the dress from her body, the ribbons from her hair, and 
stuff it all into a corner where ir will be thoroughly 
hidden and won’t be an unneccssarj^ reminder of times 
better forgotten. Then she will take the big pail and 
the broom, clench her teeth, and set to work. In the 
meantime, however, she had to tell K. everything so that 
he, who would not have realised this even now without 
help, might for once see clearly how horridly he had 
trAted Pepi and how unhappy he had made her. 
Admittedly, he, too, had only been made use of and 
misused in all this. 

Pepi had finished. Taking a long breath, she wiped a 
lew tears from her eyes and cheeks and then looWd at K., 



THE CASTLE 


374 

nodding, as if meaning to say that at bottom what 
mattered was not her misfortune at all, she would bear 
it all right, for that she needed neither help nor comfort 
from anyone at all, and least of all from K., even though 
she was so young she knew something about life, and 
her misfortune was only a confirmation of what she knew 
already, but what mattered was K., she had wanted to 
show him what he himseff was like, even after the collapse 
of all her hopes she had thought it necessary to do that. 

“ What a wild imagination you have, Pepi,'' K. said. 
“ For it isn't true at all that you have discovered all 
these things only now ; all this is, of course, nothing 
but dreams out of that dark, narrow room you chamber- 
maids have downstairs, dreams that are in their place 
there, but which look odd here in the freedom of the 
tap-room. You couldn't maintain your position here 
with such ideas, that goes without saying. Even your 
dress and your way of doing your hair, which you make 
such a boast of, are only freaks born of that darkness and 
those bunks in your room, there they are very beautiful, 
I am sure, but here everyone laughs at them, secretly or 
openly. And the rest of your story ? So I have been 
misused and deceived, have I ? No, my dear Pepi, I have 
not been misused and deceived any more than you have. 
It is true, Frieda has left me for the present or has, as 
you put it, run away with one of the assistants, you do 
sec a glimmer of the truth, and it is really very improbable 
that she will ever become my wife, but it is utterly and 
completely untrue that I have grown tired of her and stijl 
less that I drove her out the very next day or that Ihe 
deceived me, as other women perhaps deceive a man. 
You chamber-maids arc used to spying through key-* 
holes, and from that you set this way of thinking, of 
drawing conclusions, as grand as they are false, about the 



THE CASTLE 


?75 

u'hole situation from some little thing you really sec* 
The consequence of this is that I, for instance, in this case 
know much less than you. I cannot explain by any 
means as exactly as you can why Frieda left me. The 
most probable explanation seems to me to be that you 
have touched on but not elaborated, which is that I 
neglected her. That is unfortunately true, I did neglect 
her, but there were special reascttis for that, which have 
nothing to do with this discussion ; I should be happy 
if she were to come back to me, but I should at once 
begin to neglect her all over again. This is how it is. 
While she was with me I was continually out on those 
wanderings that you make such a mock of ; now that 
she is gone I am almost unemployed, am tired, have a 
yearning for a state of even more complete unemploy- 
ment, Have you no advice to give me, Pepi ? '* “ Oh 

yes, I have,** Pepi said, suddenly becoming animated and 
seizing K. by the shoulders, we have both been 
deceived, let us stick together. Come downstairs with 
me to the maids ! ** ** So long as you complain about 

being deceived,** K. said, ** I cannot come to an under- 
standing with you. You are always claiming to have been 
deceived because you find it flattering and touching. Rut 
the truth is that you are not fitted for this job. How 
obvious your unfittedness must be when even I, who in 
your view know less about things than anyone, can see 
that. You are a good girl, Pepi ; but it is not altogether 
easy to realise that, I for instance at first took you to be 
cruel and haughty, but you are not so, it is only this 
jo6*that confuses you because you are not fitted for it. 

I am not going to say that the job is too grand for you ; 
It is, after all, not a very splendid job, perhaps, if one 
regards it closely, it is somewhat more honourable than 
your previous job, on the whole, however, the difference 



THE CASTLE 


376 

is not great, both arc indeed so similar one can hardly 
distinguish between them; indeed, one might almost 
assert that being a chamber-maid is preferable to the tap- 
room, for there one is always among secretaries, here, on 
the other hand, even though one is allowed to serve the 
secretaries' chiefs in the private rooms, still, one also has 
to have a lot to do with quite common people, for 
instance with me ; actually I am not really supposed to 
sit about anywhere but right here in the tap-room — ^and 
is it such a great and glorious honour to assbeiate with 
me ? Well, it seems so to you, and perhaps you have 
your reasons for thinking so. But precisely that makes 
you unfitted. It is a job like any other, but for you it is 
heaven, consequently you set about everything with 
exaggerated eagerness, trick yourself out as in your 
opinion the angels are tricked out — but in reality they are 
different — tremble for the job, feel you arc constantly 
being persecuted, try by means of being excessively 
pleasant to win over everyone who in your opinion might 
be a support to you, but in this way bother them and 
repel them, for what they want at the inn is peace and 
quiet and not the bar-maids' worries on top of their own. 
It is just possible that after Frieda left none of the exalted 
guests really noticed the occurrence, but to-day they 
know of it and arc really longing for Frieda, for Frieda 
doubtless did manage everything quite differently. 
Whatever she may be like otherwise and however much 
she valued her job, in her work she was greatly experienced 
cool and composed, you yourself stress that, though 
admittedly without learning anything from it. Did ybu 
ever notice the way she looked at things ? That was not 
merely a bar-maid's way of looking at things, it was 
almost the way a landlady looks around. She saw 
everything, and every individual person into the bargain, 



THE CASTLE 


377 


and the ghnee that was left for each individual person 
was still intense enough to subdue him. What did it 
matter that she was perhaps a little skinny, a little 
oldish, that one could imagine cleaner hair ? — those arc 
trifles compared with what she re'ally had, and anyone 
whom these deficiencies disturbed would only have 
shown that he lacked any appreciation of greater things. 
One can certainly not charge Klianm with that, and it is 
only the wrong point of view of a young, inexperienced 
girl that ifiakes you unable to believe in Klamm’s love 
for Frieda. Klamm seems to you — and this rightly — to 
be out of reach, and that is why you believe Frieda 
could not have got near to him either. You arc wrong. 
I should take Frieda's own word for this, even if I had 
not infallible evidence for it. However incredible it 
seems to you and however little you can reconcile it 
with your notions of the world and officialdom and 
gentility and the effect a woman's beauty has, still, it is 
true, just as we are sitting here beside each other and I 
take your hand between my hands, so too, I dare say, 
and as though it were the most natural thing in the world, 
did Klamm and Frieda sit beside each other, and he came 
down of his own free will, indeed he came hurrying 
down, nobody was lurking in the passage waiting for 
him and neglecting the rest of the work, Klamm had to 
bestir himself and come downstairs, and the faults in 
Frieda's way of dressing, which would have hon ified you, 
did not disturb him at all. You won't believe her ! 
And you don't know how you give yourself away by this, 
hotv precisely in this you show your lack of experience ! 
Even someone who knew nothing at all about the affair 
with Klamm could not fail to see from her bearing that 
someone had moulded her, someone who was more 
than you and I and all the people in the village and that 



THE CASTLE 


378 

fhcir conversations went beyond the jokes that are usual 
between customers and waitresses and which seem to be 
your aim in life. But I am doing you an injustice. You 
can see Frieda's merits very well for yourself, you notice 
her power of observation, her resolution, her influence on 
people, only you do, of course, interpret it all wrongly, 
believing she turns everything self-seekingly to account 
only for her own benefit and for evil purposes, or even 
as a weapon against you. No, Pepi, even if she had 
such arrows, she could not shoot them at %uch short 
range. And self-seeking ? One might rather say that 
by sacrificing what she had and what she was entitled 
to expect she has given us both the opportunity to prove 
our worth in higher positions, but that we have both 
disappointed her and are positively forcing her to return 
here. I do not know whether it is like this, and my own 
guilt is by no means clear to me, only when I compare 
myself with you something of this kind dawns on me : 
it is as if we had both striven too intensely, too noisily, 
too childishly, with too little experience, to get some- 
thing that for instance with Frieda's calm and Frieda's 
matter-of-factness can be got easily and without much 
ado. We have tried to get it by crying, by scratching, by 
tugging — just as a child tugs at the tablecloth, gaining 
nothing, but only bringing all the splendid things down 
on the floor and putting them out of its reach for ever. 
I don't know whether it is like that, but what I am sure 
of is that it is more likely to be so than the way you 
describe it as being." " Oh well," Pepi said, " you are 
in love with Frieda because she's run away from you^'it 
isn't hard to be in love with her when she's not there. 
But let it be as you like, and even if you are right in 
cvcr)'thing, even in making me ridiculous, what are you 
going to do now ? Frieda has left you, neither according 



THE CASTLE 


379 

ro my explanation nor according to your own have you 
any hope of her coming back to you, and even if she 
were to come back, you have to stay somewhere in the 
meantime, it is cold, and you have neither work nor a 
bed, come to us, you will like my *girl friends, we shall 
make you comfortable, you will help us with our work, 
which is really too hard for girls to do all by themselves, 
we girls will not have to rely only^n ourselves and won’t 
be frightened any more in the night I Come to us ! 
My girl fnends also know Frieda, we shall tell you 
stories about her till you are sick and tired of it. Do 
come ! We have pictures of Frieda too and we’ll show 
them to you. At that time Frieda was more modest 
than she is to-day, you will scarcely recognise her, only 
perhaps by her eyes, which even then had a suspicious, 
watchful expression. Well now, are you coming ? ” 

' But is it permitted? Only yesterday there was that 
great scandal because I was caught in your passage.” 
“ Because you were caught, but when you arc with us 
you w^on't be caught. Nobody w'ill know about you, 
only the three of us. Oh, it will be jolly. Even now life 
there seems much more bearable to me than only a little 
while ago. Perhaps now I shall not lose so very much 
by having to go aw'ay from here. Listen, even with only 
the three of us we were not bored, one has to swxctcn 
the bitterness of one’s life, it’s made bitter for us when 
we're still young, well, the three of us stick together, we 
live as nicely as is possible there, you'll like Henrietxe 
particularly, but you’ll like Emilie too, I've told them 
abdiit you, there one listens to such tales without 
believing them, as though outside the room nothing 
could really happen, it’s warm and snug and tight there, 
and we press together still more tiglitly ; no, although wc 
have only each other to rely on, we have not become tired 



THE CASTLE 


380 

of each other ; on the contrary, when I think of my 
girl friends, I am almost glad that I am going back. 
Why should I get on better than they do ? For that was • 
just what held us together, the fact that the future was 
barred to all three of us in the same way, and now I have 
broken through after all and was separated from them. 
Of course, I have not forgotten them, and my first 
concern was how I cdfeild do something for them ; my 
own position was still insecure — how insecure it was, I 
did not even realise — and I was already talking to the ^ 
landlord about Henriette and Emilie. So far as Henriettc 
was concerned the landlord was not quite unrelenting, 
but for Emilie, it must be confessed, who is much older 
than we are, she's about as old as Frieda, he gave me no 
hope. But only think, they don't want to go away, they 
know it's a miserable life they lead there, but they have 
resigned themselves to it, good souls, I think their tears 
as we said goodbye were mostly because they were sad 
about my having to leave our common room, going out 
into the cold — to us there everything seems cold that is 
outside the room — and having to make my way in the 
big strange rooms with big strange people, for no other 
purpose than to earn a living, which after all I had ^ 
managed to do up to now in the life we led together. 
They probably won't be at all surprised when now I come 
back, and only in order to indulge me they will weep a 
little and bemoan my fate. But then they will sec you 
and notice that it was a good thing after all that I went 
away. It will make them happy that now we have a 
man as pl helper and protector, and they will be absolfttely 
delighted that it must all be kept a secret and that 
through this secret we shall be still more tightly linked 
with each other than before. Come, oh please come to > 
us ! No obligation will arise so far as you are concerned, j 



THE CASTLE 


?8i 

you will not be bound to our room for ever, as we arc 
When the spring comes and you find a lodging somcwhcr 
else and if you don t like being with us any more, then 
you can go if you want to ; only, of course, you must 
keep the secret even then and not go and betray us, for 
that would mean our last hour in the Herrenhof had 
come, and in other respects too, naturally, you must be 
careful when you are with us,.,not showing yourself 
anywhere unless we regard it as safe, and altogether take 
our advice ;• that is the only thing that ties you, and this 
must count just as much with you as with us, but other- 
wise you are completely free, the work we shall share out 
to you will not be too hard, you needn't be afraid of that. 
Well then, are you coming ? " How much longer is it 
till spring ? " K. asked. ‘‘ Till spring ? " Pepi repeated. 
“ Winter is long here, a very long winter, and 
monotonous. But we don't complain about that down 
there, we are safe from the winter. Well yes, some day 
spring comes too, and summer, and there's a time for 
that too, I suppose ; but in memor)^ now, spring and 
summer seem as short as though they didn't last much 
longer than two days, and even on those days, even during 
the most beautiful day, even then sometimes snow 
falls." 

At this moment the door opened. Pepi started, in her 
thoughts she had gone too far away from the tap-roorn, 
but it was not Frieda, it was the landlady. She pretended 
to be amazed at finding K. still here. K. excused himself 
by saying that he had been waiting for her, and at the 
samt^ time he expressed his thanks for having been 
allowed to stay here overnight. The landlady could not 
understand why K. had been waiting for her. K. said he 
had had the impression that she wanted to speak to him 
again, he apologised if that had been a mistake, and for 



THE CASTLE 


382 

the rest he must go now anyway, he had left the school, 
where he was caretaker, to itself much too long, yesterday's 
summons was to blame for everything, he still had too, 
little experience of these matters, it would certainly not 
happen again that he would cause the landlady such 
inconvenience and bother as yesterday. And he bowed, 
on the point of going. The landlady looked at him as 
though she were dreapiing. This gaze kept K. longer 
than was his intention. Now she smiled a little, and it 
was only the amazement on K.'s face that, as it were, 
woke her up ; it was as though she had been expecting 
an answer to her smile and only now, since none came, 
did she wake up. ‘‘ Yesterday, I think, you had the 
impudence to say something about my dress.'" K. could 
not remember. You can't remember ? Then it's not 
only impudence, but afterwards cowardice into the 
bargain." By way of excuse K. spoke of his fatigue of 
the previous day, saying it was quite possible that he 
had talked some nonsense, in any case he could not 
remember now. And what could he have said about the 
landlady's clothes ? That they were more beautiful than 
any he had ever seen in his life. At least he had never 
seen any landlady at her work in such clothes. " That's 
enough of these remarks! " thc^ landlady said swiftly 
" I don't want to hear another word from you about 
clothes. My clothes are none of your business. Once 
and for all, 1 forbid you to talk about tfiem." K. bowed 
again and went to the door. " What do you mean," the 
landlady shouted after him, " by saying you've never 
before seen any landlady at work in such clojtes ' 
What do you mean by making such senseless remarks ? 
It's simply quite senseless. What do you mean by it ? ” 
K. turned round and begged the landlady not to get 
excited. Of course the remark was senseless. After all, 



THE CASTLE 


he knew nothing at all about clothes. In his sitiwtion 
any ckess that happened to be clean and not patched 
seemed luxurious. He had only been amazed at the 
landlady's appearing there, in the passage, at night, 
among all those scantily dressed men, in such a beautiful 
evening-dress, that was ail. Well now," the landlady 
said, " at last you seem to have remembered the remark 
you made yesterday, after all. Aryl you put the finishing- 
touch to it by some more nonsense. It's quite true you 
don't know anything about clothes. But then kindly 
refrain — this is a serious request I make to you — from 
setting yourself up as a judge of what are luxurious 
dresses or unsuitable evening-dresses, and the like. . . . 
And let me tell you " — here it seemed as if a cold 
shudder went through her — " you’ve no business to 
mterfere with my clothes in any way at all, do you hear ? " 
And as K. was about to turn away again in silence, she 
asked : " Where did you get your knowledge of clothes, 
anyway ? " K, shrugged his shoulders, saying he had 
no knowledge. " You have none," the landlady said. 
" Very V ^11 then, don’t set up to have any, either. 
Come over to the office. I'll show you something, then 
I hope you'll stop ycur impudent remarks for good." 
She went through the door ahead of him ; Pepi ruslied 
forward to K., on the pretext of settling the bill : they 
quickly ma^e their plans, it was very easy, since K. 
knew the courtyard with the gate opening into the side- 
street, beside the gate there was a little door behind 
which Pepi would stand in about an hour and open it 
on hearing a three-fold knock. 

Tfie private office was opposite the tap-room, they only 
had to cross the hall, the landlady was already standing 
in the lighted office and impatiently looking towards K. 
^ut there was yet another disturbance. Gerstacker liad 



THE CASTLE 


384 

been waiting in the hall and wanted to talk to K. It was 
not easy to shake him off, the landlady also joined in 
and rebuked Gerstacker for his intrusiveness. Where 
are you going ? Where are you going ? " Gerstacker 
could still be heard tailing out even after the door was 
shut, and the words were unpleasantly interspersed with 
sighs and coughs. 

It was a small, overiheated room. Against the end- 
walls were a standing-desk and an iron safe, against the 
side-walls were a wardrobe and an ottoman. • It was the 
wardrobe that took up most room ; not only did it 
occupy the whole of the longer wall, its depth also made 
the room very narrow, it had three sliding-doors by which 
it could be opened completely. The landlady pointed to 
the ottoman, indicating that K. should sit down, she 
herself sat down on the revolving chair at the desk. 
** Didn't you once learn tailoring ? " the landlady asked. 
** No, never," K. said. " What actually is it you are ? " 
** Land Surveyor." " What is that ? " K. explained, 
the explanation made her yawn. " You're not telling 
the truth. Why won't you tell the truth ? " " You 

don't tell the truth either." " I ? So now you're 
beginning your impudent remarks again? And if I 
didn't tell the truth — do I have to answer for it to you ? 
And in what way don't I tell the truth then ? " "You 
are not only a landlady, as you pretend." " Just listen 
to that I All the things you discover ! What else am I 
then ? But I must say, your impudence is getting 
thoroughly out of hand." "I don't know whar else 
you are. I only see that you arc a landlady and also v^ar 
clothes that are not suitable for a landlady and of a kind 
that to the best of my knowledge nobody else wears here 
in the village." " Well, now we're getting to the point. 
The fact is you can't keep it to yourself, perhaps you 



THE CASTLE 


385 

aren't impudent at all, you're only like a child that 
knows some silly thing or other and which simply can't, 
by any means, be made to keep it to itself. Well, speak 
up ! What is so special about these clothes ? " You'll 
be angiy if I say." " No, I shall laugh about it, it'll be 
some childish chatter. What sort of clothes are they 
then ? " You insist on hearing. Well, they're made 
of good material, pretty expensive, but they arc old- 
hishioned, fussy, often renovated, worn, and not suitable 
either for your age or for your figure or for your position. 
I was struck by them the very first time I saw you, it 
was about a week ago, here in the hall." " So there now 
we have it I They are old-fashioned, fussy, and what else 
did you say ? And what enables you to judge all this ? " 
" I can see for myself, one doesn't need any training for 
that." "You can see it without more ado. You don't 
have to enquire anywhere, you know at once what is 
required by fashion. So you're going to be quite 
indispensable to me, for I must admit I have a weakness 
for beautiful clothes. And what will you say when 1 tell 
you that this wardrobe is full of dresses ? " She pushed 
the sliding doors open, one dress could be seen tightly 
packed against the next, filling up the whole length and 
breadth of the wardrobe, they were mostly dark, grey, 
brown, black dresses, all carefully hung up and spread 
our. " These are my dresses, all old-fashioned, fussy, 
as you think. But they are only the dresses for which I 
have no room upstairs in my room, there 1 have two more 
wardrobes full, two wardrobes, each of them almost as 
big tis this one. Are you amazed ? " " No, I was 

expecting something of the sort ; didn't I say you re 
not only a landlady, you're aiming at something else." 
" I am only aiming at dressing beautifully, and you arc 
either a fool or a child or a very' wicked, dangerous 

13 



THE CASTLE 


386 

person. Go, go away now ! " K. was already in tlic 
hall and Gerstacker was clutching at his sleeve again, 
when the landlady shouted after him : “ I am getting 
a new dress to-morrow, perhaps I shall send for 
you. 




APPENDIX 


I 

CONTINUATION OF THE MANUSCRIPT 


2 

ANOTHER VERSION OF THE OPENING 
PARAGRAPHS 


3 

FRAGMENTS 


4 

TWO ADDITIONAL PASSAGES INCLUDED IN 
THE TEXT OF THE DEFINITIVE GERMAN 
EDITION 


5 

THE PASSAGES DELETED BY THE AUTHOR 


38S 



APPENDIX 


1 

CONTINUATION OF THE MANUSCRIPT 

Gerstacljer, angrily gesticulating, as if trying from a 
distance to silence the landlady, who was disturbing him, 
asked K. to go with him. At first he would not give 
any further explanation. He took hardly any notice of 
K.'s objection that he must now go back to the school. 
Only when K. protested at being hauled away by him 
did Gerstacker tell him there was nothing to worry 
about, he would get everything he needed at his house, 
he could give up the job as janitor at the school, only 
he was to come along without further delay, he Iiad been 
waiting for him all day, his mother had no idea where he 
was. Slowly giving way to him, K. asked what, then, he 
was going to provide board and lodging for. Gerstacker 
answered only vaguely that he needed K. to help with the 
horses, for he himself had other business to attend to, 
but now K. was to stop resisting like this and making 
unnecessary difficulties for him. If he wanted wages, he 
would give him wages too. But now K. stopped, in spite 
of all the tugging. He said he did not know anything 
at all about horses. Nor was it necessary that he should, 
Gerstacker said impatiently and clasped his hands in 
annoyance, in order to induce K. to come on. “ I know 
why you want to take me with you,” K. said at length. 
Gerstacker did not know what K. knew. “ Because you 
think I can do something for you with Erlanger.” 

3*9 



THE CASTLE 


390 

Certainly/' Gerstackcr said, " what interest should I 
have in you otherwise ? " K. laughed, linked arms with 
Gerstackcr and let himself be led through the darkness 
by him. , 

The room in Gcrstacker's hovel was only dimly lit by 
the fire in the hearth and by a stub of candle, by the 
light of which someone hunched up in a recess under the 
slanting rafters, which overhung there, was reading a book. 
It was Gcrstacker's mother. She held out a tremulous 
hand to K. and made him sit down beside hcr,*she spoke 
with an effort, it was difficult to understand her, but 
what she said, 


ANOTHER VERSION 

Now Gerstackcr thought his time had come at last. 
Despite the fact that he had all the time been trying to 
gain a hearing with K., he began, he obviously could not 
help it, rather roughly. Have you got a job ? he asked. 
** Yes,*’ K. said, ‘‘a very good one.'* ‘'Where?" 
" At the school." " But you're a Land Surveyor, aren't 
you ? " "Yes, but it's only a temporary job, I'm only 
staying on there till I get the certificate of my appointment 
as Land Surveyor. Do you understand ? " "Yes, and 
will that take much longer? " " No, no, it may come 

at any moment, I was talking to Erlanger about it 
yesterday." "To Erlanger?" "You know I was. 
Don't be tiresome. Go away. Leave me alone." 
" Well yes, you've spoken to Erlanger. I thought it was 
a secret." " I wouldn't share my secrets with you. 
After all, you're the fellow who snarled at me when I 
got stuck in the snow outside your door." " Yes, but 
then I drove you to the Bridge Inn, didn't I ? " " That's 



THE CASTLE 


want ? '' Have you any money to spare ? Do you get 

good wages at the school?" " Enough to live on." 
“ I could tell you of a job where you'd get better pay." 
" With you, I suppose, with the h9rses ? No thanks." 
" Who told you ? " " You've been hanging about since 
last night, trying to get hold of me." " You're very 
much mistaken there." " If I'm mistaken, so much the 
better.' " Only now, seeing you in your desperate 
.situation, ^ou, a Land Surveyor, an educated man. in 
dirty, ragged clothes, without a fur coat, so down and 
out that it's quite heart-rending, hand-in-glovc with that 
little wretch Pepi, who's probabi)' supporting you, only 
now I've remembered what my mother once said : 

‘ This man shouldn't be let go to the dogs " A good 
saying. That's the very reason why I'm not coming 
\ ou." 


2 

ANOTHER VERSION OF THE OPENING 
PARAGRAPHS 

The landlord welcomed the guest. A room on the 
lirst floor had been got ready. " The royal apartment,” 
rhe landlord said. It was a large room with two windows 
and a glass door between them, it was distressingly large 
in its bareness. The few pieces of furniture that stood 
about in it had strangely thin legs, one might have 
thought they were made of iron, but they were made of 
wood. " Kindly do not step out on the balcony,’ the 
landlord said, when the guest, after he had looked out 
of one of the windows, into the night, approached rhe 
glass door. " The beam is slightly rotten." The 



THE CASTLE 


392 

chamber-maid came in and busied herself at the wash- 
stand, at the same time asking whether the room was 
warm enough. The guest nodded. But although he had 
up to now found nQ fault with the room, he was still 
walking up and down fully dressed, in his overcoat, 
with his stick and hat in his hand, as though it were not 
yet settled whether he would stay here. The landlord 
was standing beside ttie chamber-maid. Suddenly the 
guest stepped up behind the two of them and exclaimed : 
“ Why are you whispering ? Frightened, tiie landlord 
said : ''I was only giving the maid instructions about 
the bedclothes. The room is unfortunately, as I only 
now see, not so carefully prepared as I should have wished. 
But everything will be done in a moment.*' ** That's nor 
the point," the guest said, " I expected nothing but a 
filthy hovel and a repulsive bed. Don't try to distract my 
attention. There's only one thing I want to know ; who 
informed you in advance of my arrival ? " " Nobody, 

sir," the landlord said. " You were expecting me." " I 
am an innkeeper and expect guests." " The room was 
prepared." " As always." " Very well then, you knew 
nothing, but I am not going to stay here." And he 
pushed a window open and shouted out of it : " Don’t 
unharness, we're driving on ! " But as he hurried to the 
door, the chamber-maid stepped in his way, a weakly, in 
fact far too young, frail girl, and said with lowered head : 
" Don't go away ; yes, we were expecting you, it was 
only because we are clumsy at answering, uncertain of 
your wishes, that we concealed it." The girl's appearance 
touched the guest ; her words seemed to him suspiftous. 
" Leave me alone with the girl," he said to the landlord. 
The landlord hesitated, then he went. " Come," the 
guest said to the girl, and they sat down at the table. 

' What is your name ? " the guest asked, reaching across 



THE CASTLE 


m 

the tabic and taking the girl's hand Elisabeth," she 
said. Elisabeth, he said, “ listen to me carefully. 
I have a difficult task ahead of me and have dedicated my 
whole life to it. I do it joyfully ^nd ask for nobody's 
pity. ‘But because it is all I have, the task I mean. I 
ruthlessly suppress everjThing that might disturb me in 
carr^’ing it out. I tell you, I can be mad in my ruthlcss- 
ness." He pressed her hand, slic gazed at him and 
nodded. "Well, so you have understood that," he said, 
“ now explain to me how you people learnt of my arrival. 
That is all I want to know, I am not asking what views 
you hold. I am here to fight, certainly, but I don't 
want to be attacked before my arrival. Well, what 
happened before I came ? " " The whole village knows 

of your arrival, I can't explain it, everyone has known for 
veeks, I suppose it comes from the Castle, I don't know 
any more than that." " Someone from the Castle was 
here and announced I was coming?" " No, nobody 
was here, the gentlemen from the Castle don't associate 
u'lth us, but the servants up there may have talked of it, 
people from the village may have heard it, so it got 
around perhaps. So few strangers come here, after all, 
people talk a lot about a stranger." " Few strangers ? " 
the guest asked. " Alas," the girl said and smiled — she 
looked both confiding and aloof — " nobody comes, it is as 
though the world had forgotten us." " Why should 
anyone come here anyway," the guest said, " after all, is 
there anything worth seeing here?" The girl slowly 
witjidrew her hand and said : " You still don't trust me. 

“ A Ad rightly," the guest said and stood up. "You are 
all a crowd of villains, but you are even more dangerous 
than the landlord. You have been specially sent from the 
Castle to wait on me." " Sent from the Castle ? the 
girl said. " How little you know conditions here I It 



THE CASTLE 


J96 

never had any hope of being admitted into the Castle 
chanceries. He contents himself with the secretaries, 
when they come down from the Castle to the Herrenhof, 
now he has to undergo day interrogations, now night 
interrogations, and he's always prowling around the 
Herrenhof, like the foxes round the hen-house, only that 
in reality the secretaries are the foxes and he is the hen. 
But that is only by the way, I was going to tell you about 
Biirgel. Well then, last night K. was summoned to the 
Herrenhof once again in connection with his affair, to see 
Secretary Erlanger, with whom he mainly has to do. He’s 
always in raptures over such a summons, in this respect 
disappointments have no effect on him — if only one 
could learn that from him I Each new summons 
reinforces, not his old disappointments, but only his old 
hope. Lent wings by this summons, then, he hurries to 
the Herrenhof. Admittedly he is not in a good state, 
he was not expecting the summons, hence he had gone 
on various errands in the village with regard to his cause, 
you know by this time he has more connections here than 
families that have been living here for centuries, all these 
connections are meant solely to serve this land-surveyor 
affair of his and, since they are the result of hard fighting 
and have to be fought for over and over again, an eye 
must be kept on them all the time. You must get a 
proper picture of this, all these connections are positively 
lying in wait for a chance to slip away from him. And 
so he constantly has his hands full, looking after them. 
And yet he finds the time to have long discussions \yith 
me or anyone else about quite irrelevant things, but? this 
only for the reason that nothing is so irrelevant that in 
his opinion it is not connected with his affair. So he is 
always at work ; actually it never struck me that he 
sleeps too. Yet this is the case, sleep does in fact play 



THE CASTLE 


397 

the main part in the affair with Biirgeh The fact is 
that when he hurried into the Herrenhof to see Erlanger, 
he was already immeasurably tired, after all he had not 
been prepared for the summons and had frivolously 
wasted his energy, not having slept at all the night before, 
and the two previous nights each only two or three hours. 
For this reason, though Erlanger^s summons, made out 
for midnight, made him happy, a# any such slip of paper 
does, at the same time it made him worried about the 
condition lie was in, which might prevent him from 
being as much of a match for the strain of the interview 
as he would otherwise have been. So he arrives at the 
Herrenhof, goes into the passage where the secretaries 
have their rooms and there, to his misfortune, meets a 
chamber-maid he knows. He has no lack of affairs with 
women, you know, and all for the good of his cause. 
This girl had something to tell him about another girl he 
also knew, drew him into her little room, he followed — it 
was not yet midnight — for it is his principle never to miss 
any opportunity of learning anything new. This, indeed, 
besides its advantages, sometimes, and perhaps very 
often, produces great disadvantages too, as it did this 
time, for instance, for, when he got away from the 
gossiping girl, half-demented with sleepiness, and was 
out in the passage again, it was four o’clock. He could 
think of nothing but not missing the appointment with 
Erlanger. He fortified himself a little, perhaps indeed 
too much, from a decanter of rum that he found on a 
tray forgotten in a corner, tiptoed along the long passage, 
at other times so full of bustle and now as quiet as a 
path through a cemetery, till he came to the door that 
he took to be Erlanger *s door, didn’t knock, in order not 
to wake Erlanger, supposing he were asleep, but opened 
the door at once, though with extreme caution. And 



THE CASTLE 


J98 

now I am going to tell you the story as well as I can 
word for word, and as much in detail as K. told it to me 
yesterday with all the signs of mortal despair. I hope 
he has meanwhile been consoled by a new summons. But 
the story itself is really too funny, just listen : what is 
actually so funny about it is, of course, his own pain- 
stakingly detailed account, and a good deal of that will 
get lost in my re-telliAg of it. If I could really bring it 
out, it would give you a full-length picture of K. himself, 
though of Biirgel hardly a trace. If I could brhig it out — 
that is the pre-condition. For otherwise the story may 
equally well turn out to be very boring, it contains that 
element coo. But let us risk it. 


. • . shaking hands, saying goodbye, but I was very 
glad to have this talk with you, it is positively a weight off 
my mind. Perhaps I shall see you again before long.'' 

** I dare say it will be necessary for me to come," K. 
said and bowed over Mizzi's hand, he wanted to get the 
better of his feelings and kiss it, but Mizzi pulled it 
away with a little scream of fright and hid it under the 
pillow. " Mizzi, Mizzi, my pet," the Mayor said 
indulgently and affectionately, stroking her back. 

" You are always welcome," he said, perhaps in order 
to help K. to overlook Mizzi's behaviour, but then he 
added : " Particularly now, as long as I am ill. When 
I am able to get back to my desk, of course, I shall be 
quite taken up with official work." " Do you inteqd to 
convey by that," K. asked, " that even you were not 
speaking to me officially to-day ? " 

" Certainly," the Mayor said, " I have never spoken 
to you officially, one may perhaps call it semi-officially. 



THE CASTLE 


You underrate the non-official clement, as I said before, 
but you also underrate the official element. An official 
decision is, after all, not just something like, for instance, 
this medicine bottle, standing here on this little table. 
One reaches out for it and has it. 'A real official decision 
is preceded by innumerable little investigations and 
considerations, it requires years of work by the best 
officials, even in a case when rfiese officials happen to 
know from the very beginning what the final decision 
is. Andfis there then any such thing as a final decision? 
The control offices are there, of course, to prevent it from 
arising.** 

“ Well, yes,** K. said, “ it’s all excellently organised, 
who still doubts that ? But you have expounded it to me 
in general far too alluringly for me not to exert myself 
now, with all my strength, to get to know it in derail.” 

Bows were exchanged, and K. left. The asMstants 
remained behind to take a special farewell, with whis- 
pering and laughter, but soon followed. 

At the inn K. found his room beautified to the point 
of being unrecognisable. This was all the doing of 
Frieda, who received him with a kiss on the threshold. 
The room had been thoroughly aired, the stove well 
stoked up, the floor washed/the bed tidied, the maids’ 
things, including their pictures, had all gone, thcie was 
only one new photograph now' hanging on the wall over 
the bed. K. went nearer, pictures . . . 


. . . on the contrary, wherever I wanted, and with the 
passionate enthusiasm of children, into the bargam. In 
this hasty walking to and fro I found myself for t c 
moment beside Amalia, gently rook the knitting out oi 



THE CASTLfi 


400 

her hand and threw it on the table, at which the rest of 
the family was already sitting. “ What are you doing ? 
Olga exclaimed. “ Oh/' I said, half angrily, half 
smiling, " you all annoy me." And I sat down in the 
chimney-corner, taking on my lap a little black cat that 
had been sleeping there. How much a stranger and yet 
how much at home I was there, I had not yet shaken hands 
with the two old peopldif had scarcely spoken to the girls 
any more than I had to this new Barnabas, as he here 
seemed to me to be, and yet I was sitting h^te in the 
warmth, unheeded, because I had already quarrelled a 
little with the girls, and the friendly cat scrambled up 
my chest on to my shoulder. And even if I had been 
disappointed here, too, still, it was from here, too, that 
new hopes came. Barnabas had not gone to the Castle 
now, but he would go in the morning, and even if that 
girl from the Castle did not come here, another one 
would. 


Frieda also waits, but not for K. ; she watches the 
Herrenhof and watches K. ; she has no need to worry, 
her situation is more favourable than she herself expected, 
she can look on without envy at how Pepi exerts herself, 
at how Pepi's reputation grows, she will, of course, put a 
stop to it when the time comes, she can also afford to 
look on calmly, watching K. knocking about, away from 
her, she will see to it that he doesn't leave her for good. 



4 


TWO ADDITIONAL PASSAGES INCLLT)ED IN 
THE TEXT OF THE DEFINITIVE GERMAN 
EDITION 

(l). Reference : Fischer edition, p. 197, 1 . 16, to end of 
paragraph (over), English, Muir translation, p. 185, 
1. 22, after ** he, Hans, could see through." 

In fact Hans was now seeking K.*s aid against his 
father ; it was as if he had been deluding himself in 
believing he wanted to help K., when in reality he had 
been wanting to discover whether, since nobody in lus 
old surroundings had been able to help, this sudden 
newcomer, who had now even been mentioned by his 
mother, might perhaps be capable of doing so. How 
unconsciously secretive, almost underhand, this boy was. 
Hitherto it had scarcely been possible to gather this 
from his appearance and his speech ; one observed it 
only in the confessions wormed out of him as it were 
after the event, by chance or by deliberation. And now, 
in long discussions with K., he considered the difficulties 
that would have to be overcome. With the best of good 
will on Hans's part, they remained almost insurmountable 
difficulties ; lost in thought and at the same time groping 
for help, he kept gazing at K. with restlessly blinking 
ejics. He could not say anything to his mother before 
his* father left, otherwise his father would come to hear 
of it and the whole plan would be scotched, and so he 
could only mention it later ; but even then, out of 
consideration for his mother, it could not be mentioned 

401 



THE CASTLE 


402 

suddenly and startlingly, but must be said slowly and 
when a suitable opportunity occurred ; only then could 
he beg his mother to agree, only then could he fetch K. 
But would it not be too late by that time, would there 
not be danger of his father's returning by then ? No, it 
was impossible after all. K., on the contrary, proved 
that it was not impossible. One need not be afraid that 
there would not be enoifigh time, a short conversation, a 
short meeting, would be sufficient, and Hans would not 
need to fetch K. K. would be in hiding sbmewhere 
near the house and would come at once on getting a sign 
from Hans. No, Hans said, K. must not wait near the 
house — again it was sensitiveness on his mother's account 
that dictated his reaction — K. must not start without his 
mother's knowledge, Hans must not enter into such a 
sea*et agreement with K., deceiving his mother ; he 
must fetch K. from the school, and this not before his 
mother knew of it and gave permission. All right, K. 
said, then it was really dangerous after all, and then it 
was possible that Hans's father would catch him in the 
house ; and if this must not happen, then for fear of it 
Hans’s mother would not let K. come at all, and so the 
whole plan would be frustrated because of his father 
after all. To this Hans had another objection to make, 
and so the argument went on and on 

(2). Reference : Fischer edition, p. 217, 1 . 15, to end of 
paragraph (over), English, Muir translation, p. 202, 
z lines from end, after “ bask in her wrath and 

M « 

nearness. ^ 

His greatest pleasure was to sit beside Gisa, correaing 
exercises. To-day, again, they were occupied in this way, 
Scliwarzer had brought a great pile of copy-books, the 



THE CASTLE 


403 

teacher always gave them his as well, and so long as 
daylight lasted K. had seen the two of them working at 
a little table in the window, their heads close together, 
motionless ; now all there was to be seen there was the 
flickering of two candles. It was a solemn, taciturn love 
that united them ; it was indeed Gisa who set the tone, 
for though her slow-blooded temperament sometimes 
went wild and broke through afl barriers, at other times 
she would never have tolerated anything of the sort in 
others ; so even the vivacious Schwarzer had to knuckle 
under, walking slowly, speaking slowly, and often 
remaining silent ,* but it was plain that he was riclily 
rewarded for all this by Gisa’s mere quiet presence. And 
yet it was possible that Gisa did not love him at all ; 
at any rate, her round, grey, quire unblinking eyes, in 
which only the pupils seemed to revolve, gave no answer 
to such questions ,* all that could be seen was that she 
put up with Schwarzer uncomplainingly, but it was 
certain that she did nor appreciate what an honour it was 
to be loved by a castellan's son, and she bore her plump, 
voluptuous body in unruffled calm, regardless of whether 
Schwarzer was following her with his gaze or nor. 
Schwarzer, on the other hand, made a permanent 
sacrifice for her sake by remaining in the village ; 
messengers from his father, who frequently came to fetch 
him home, he sent about their business as indignantly 
as if even the brief reminder of the Castle and of his 
duty as a son that they constituted were a grave and 
ipreparable injury to his happiness. And yet he actually 
h»d plenty of time on his hands, for Gisa generally 
condescended to see him only during school hours and 
while correcting exercises, not, it must be admitted, out 
of calculation, but because what she loved more than 
anything was being comfortable, which meant being 



THE CASTLE 


404 

alone, and she was probably happiest when at home she 
could stretch out on the sofa, entirely at her ease, beside 
her the cat, which did not disturb her because, indeed, 
it was scarcely capable of moving any more at all. So 
Schwarzer spent a large part of the day drifting round 
without anything to do, but even this suited him, for it 
meant that he always had the chance, which he very often 
took, of going down Liofl Street, where Gisa lived, going 
upstairs to her little attic, listening at the ever-locked 
door, and then hurriedly retreating, after he hSld every 
time observed that the most complete and baffling silence 
reigned within the room. Nevertheless, even in him the 
consequences of such a mode of life made themselves 
apparent, sometimes — though never in Gisa's presence — 
in ludicrous outbursts of a momentarily re-awakened 
official arrogance, which certainly ill accorded with his 
present situation ; and then, to be sure, things did not 
usually turn out very well, as K. had seen for himself. 


5 

THE PASSAGES DELETED BY THE AUTHOR 
P. 22, 1 . 5. 

But was it acquaintances he was making ? Did he get 
even a single frank, cordial word ? As was indeed 
necessary. For it was clear to him that wasting only 
a few days here would make him incapable of ever 
acting decisively. Nevertheless he must not do anything 
hasty. 

P. 34. 1-31- 

But after a moment he regained his composure and 
said : ** My master wishes to know when he is to come 



THE CASTLE 


405 

to the Castle to-morrow/' The answer : ** Tell your 
master, but do not forget a single word of the incss^igc : 
Even if he sends ten assistants to ask when he is to come 
he will always get the answer : Neither to-morrow nor at 
any other time." K. would have best liked to put tlie 
receiver down instantly. A conversation like this could 
not get him anywhere. He must set about it in some 
other way, this was clear to luni; in some way c]uite 
different from, for instance, a conversation like this. 
In this way he was not fighting the others, hut only 
himself. Of course, he had arrived yesterday, and the 
Castle had been here since ancient times. 

P.43. 1-13* 

As K. always had notions with regard to this man that 
even to him did not seem to be in accordance with reality, 
as though it were not one man but two, and only K., and 
not reality, were capable of keeping them distinct from 
each other, so he now believed that it was not his cunning, 
but his worried, faintly hopeful face, which he must have 
recognised even in the night, had induced him to take 
him along with him. On this his hope was based. 

P. 47. 1. 2 . 

K. turned round in order to find his coat, he wanted to 
put it on, wet as it was, and return to the inn, difficult 
as it might be. He thought it necessary to confess 
frankly that he had let himself be deceived, and only 
returning to the inn seemed to him a sufficient confession 
of this. Above all, however, he did not want to let any 
uiKertainty arise in his own mind, did not want to lose 
himself in an enterprise that after such great initial 
hopes had turned out to be without prospects. He shook 
off a hand tugging at his sleeve, without looking to see 
whose hand it was. 



THE CASTLE 


406 

Then he heard the old man saying to Barnabas : 
** The girl from the Castle was here/' After that they 
talked together in low voices. K. had by now become 
so mistrustful that he ^watched them for a little while 
in order to make sure whether this remark had not been 
intentionally made for his benefit. But this was doubtless 
not the case, the talkative father, now and then supported 
by the mother, had all sorts of things to tell Barnabas ; 
Barnabas liad bent down to him and while listening he 
smiled across at K., as though he were meant to join 
him in his delight over his father. Now this K. did not 
do, but all the same he did look at this smile for a 
moment in astonishment. Then he turned to the girls 
and asked : “ Do you know her ? " They did not know 
what he meant, and they were a little disconcerted, too, 
because he had, without meaning it, uttered his question 
quickly and sternly. He explained to them that he 
meant the girl from the Castle. Olga, the more gentle 
of the two — she even showed a trace of maidenly 
embarrassment, whereas Amalia looked at him with a 
serious, straight, unwavering, perhaps even slightly dull 
gaze — answered; “The girl from the Castle? Of 
course we know her. She was here to-day. Do you 
know her too ? I thought you arrived only yesterday." 
“ Yesterday, that's right. But I met her to-day, we 
exchanged a few words, but then we were interrupted. 
I should like to see her again." To diminish the effect 
of what he said, K. added ; “ She wanted some advice 
about something." But now he found Amalia's ga^e 
irritating, and he said : “ What's the matter with 

you ? Please don't keep on looking at me like that." 
But instead of apologising, Amalia only shrugged her 
shoulders and moved away, went to the table, took up a 
stocking she was knitting, and took no more notice of K. 



THH CASTl.E 


407 

Olga, in an effort to make up, on her side, for Amalia’s 
bad manners, said i She 11 probably be coming to see 
us again to-morrow, then you can talk to her.” “ All 
right, K. said, so I shall spend^rhe night here ; it is 
true i could also speak to her at Cobbler Lasemann’s, but 
I prefer to stay with you people.*’ ** At Lasemann’s ? " 

Yes, that's where I met her." " Bur then it’s a 
misunderstanding, I meant another girl, not the one who 
was at Ljsemann's." " If only you'd said so at once ! " 
K. exclaimed and began walking up and down the room, 
inconsiderately crossing it from one side to the otluT. 
A strange mixture these people's behaviour seemed to be : 
in spite of occasional friendliness they were cold, reserved, 
and even suspicious, they sometimes turned up treacher- 
ously in the name of unknown masters, but all this was 
at least partially counterbalanced — one could, admittedly, 
also say made more acute, bur K. did not regard it in 
this way, that was not in keeping with his nature — by 
awkwardness, by childishly slow and childishly timid 
thinking, even indeed by a certain docility. If one 
succeeded in making use of what was obliging in their 
character and avoiding what was hostile — something, 
indeed, that required more than ingenuity and for which 
one probably, alas, needed help even from them - then 
they would no longer be an obstacle, then they would not 
thrust K. back any more, as had happened to him all the 
time up to now, then they would bear him along. 

P. 59, I 5. 

K. was thinking more of Klamm than of her. The 
conquest of Frieda meant making a change in his plans : 
here he gained a means to power that might make the 
whole period of work in the village unnecessary. 



THE CASTLE 


408 

P. 59 » 13* 

... lay then, almost undressed, for each of them had 
torn open the other's clothes with hands and teeth, in 
the little puddles of beer. 

P. 79. I* 19- 

He was, after all, by now well able to play on this 
departmental machinery^ this delicate instrument always 
tuned for some compromise or other. The art of it lay 
essentially in doing nothing, leaving the machinery to 
work by itself and forcing it to work by the mere fact 
of oneself being there, irremovable in one's ponderous 
mortality. 

P. 86, 1 . 17 (variant reading). 

Allow me, Mr. Mayor, to interrupt you with a 
question," K. said, leaning back comfortably in his chair, 
but no longer feeling so much at ease as he had previously ; 
the Mayor's mania for imparting information, which he 
himself had constantly been endeavouring to stimulate, 
was now too much for him, " did you not a little while 
ago mention a Control Authority ? . . 

P. 89, 1 . 10. 

Now I can't go rushing along to the Town Council with 
every letter from the authorities, but Sordini didn't know 
of that letter, you know, he denied its existence, and so, 
of course, I seemed to be put in the wrong. 

P. 94, 1 . 18. 

My interpretation is different, I shall stick to it even 
though I also have quite different weapons, and shall ^^o 
all I can to get it acknowledged. 

P. no, 1 . 31. 

" In a manner of speaking he was asked," the landlady 
said, " the marriage-certificate bears his signature ; by 



THE CASTLE 


409 

accident, it must be admitted, for he was at that time 
deputising for the head of anotlier department, that’s 
why it says : ‘ Acting Head of Department, Klamm.’ 
I reincmber how I ran home from the Registrar’s office 
with* the document, didn’t even take off my wedditig- 
dress, sat down at the table, spread out the document, 
read that dear name again and again, and with the cfiildish 
eagerness of my seventeen years tried to imitate the 
signature^ tried very hard, covering whole sheers of 
paper with writing, and never noticed that Hans was 
standing behind my chair, not daring to disturb me, and 
watching me at my work. Unforiunateiy then, when 
the document had been signed by evervone concerned, it 
had to be handed in to the Municipality.” 

” Well,” K. said, ” I didn’t mean an enquir}^ like 
that, indeed nothing official at all, it is not Klamm the 
official one must speak to, but the private person. The 
official aspect of things here is mostly wrong, you see : 
for instance, if to-day you had only seen the Municipal 
Records on the floor, as I did ! And among tlicm, 
perhaps, your beloved certificate, always assuming that it 
is not kept in the barn where the rats are — I think you 
would have agreed with me.” 

P. Ill, 1 . 18. 

Perhaps it is also a legend, besides, but then it is certainly 
one that is invented only by those who have been 
abandoned, as a consolation for their life. 

P.«i II, 1 . 31. 

” Gladly,” K. said. ” And so here now is what I am 
going to say. I could put it more or less like tliis : 

* We, Frieda and I, love each other and want to marry as 
soon as possible. Yet Frieda loves not only me, but y/ju 



THE CASTLE 


410 

too, though admittedly in quite a different way, it is 
not my fault that language is so poor that it has only 
one word for both. Frieda herself does not understand 
how it comes about that there is room in her heart for 
me too, and she can only think that it became possible 
solely by your will. After everything I have heard from 
Frieda, I can only associate myself with her view. 
However, it is only an assumption, apart from which the 
only thing I can think of is that I, a stranger, a nonentity, 
as the landlady calls me, have pushed my way in between 
Frieda and you. In order to have certainty on this point 
I take the liberty of asking you how the matter stands in 
reality.* That, then, would be the first question ; I 
think it would be respectful enough.'* 

The landlady sighed. ** Oh, what a person you are,” 
she said, seemingly clever enough, but at the same time 
abysmally ignorant. You think you can negotiate with 
Klamm as if he were your fiancee’s father, more or less 
as if you had fallen in love with Olga — unfortunately you 
haven't — you would have spoken to old Barnabas. What 
a wise disposition of things it is that you will never have 
a chance to talk to Klamm.” 

” This interpolation,” K. said, ” I should not have 
heard during my conversation with him, which in any 
case would have to be conducted and therefore 

I should not have had to let myself be influenced by it. 
As regards his answer, how'ever, there are three possi- 
bilities. Either he will say ; ‘ It was not my will,' or : 
‘ It was my will,' or he will say nothing. The fi;;st 
possibility I am provisionally excluding from cny 
speculations, partly, I must say, out of consideration for 
you ; his saying nothing, however, I should interpret as 
agreement.” 

” There arc yet other possibilities, and very much more 



THE CASTLE 


411 

plausible ones,” the landlady said, ” if I do enter into 
your fairy-story idea of such a meeting at all, for instance, 
the possibility that he goes off and leaves you standing 
there.” 

“That would change nothing,” K. said. “I should 
step in his way and compel him to hear me.” 

“Compel him to hear you !_” the landlady said. 
“ Compel the lion to eat straw ! What deeds of 
heroism ! ” 

“ Always so irritable, Landlady,” K. said. “ Rut I am 
only answering your questions, I am not forcing con- 
fidences on you. In any case, w'e are nor talking a hour a 
lion at all, we are talking about the head of a department, 
and if I take the lion's lioness away from him and marry 
her, I suppose I shall at any rate have so much significance 
in his eyes that he will at least listen to me.” 

P. 112, 1 . 16. 

“ You are lost, here among us, Land Surveyor,” the 
landlady said, “ everything you say is full of misconcep- 
tions. Perhaps Frieda, as your wife, will be able to 
support you here, but it is almost too bard a task for that 
frail little thing. And she knows it, too ; w hen she 
thinks there is nobody watching her, she sighs and her 
eyes are full of tears. True, my husband is a burden to 
me too, but after all, he doesn't try to take the helm, 
and even if he did try, he might do something stupid, I 
dare say, but, as a native, nothing, after all, tliat would 
be^ ruinous ; but you are full of very dangerous mis- 
conceptions and you will never lose them. Klamrn as a 
private person. Who has ever seen Klamm as a private 
person ? Who can imagine him as a private person ? 
You can, you will object, but there you are, rhar s 
precisely the misfortune. You can do it because you 



THE CASTLE 


412 

can't imagine him as an ofiicial, because you simply can’t 
imagine him at all. Because Frieda was Klamm's 
mistress, you think she saw him as a private person, 
because we love him,^ you think we love him as a private 
person. Now, one cannot say of a real oiEcial that he is 
sometimes more and sometimes less of an official, for he 
is always an official, to full capacity. But in order at 
least to give you a clue to understanding I shall this time 
disregard it, and then I can say : Never was he more of an 
official than then at the time of my liappiness, and I and 
Frieda are unanimous in this : we love no one but the 
official Klamm, the high, the exceedingly high, official." 

P. 129, 1 . 10. 

And yet, when K. saw her sitting there, on Frieda's 
chair, beside the room . . . perhaps still harboured 
Klamm to-day, her little fat feet on the floor on whidi 
he had lain with Frieda, here in the Herrenhof, in the 
house of these gentlemeii, the officials, he could not but 
say to himself that if he had met Pepi here instead of 
Frieda and supposed her to have some kind of connections 
with the Castle — and probably she too had such con- 
nections — he would have tried to clutch the secret to 
himself with the same embraces by means of which he 
had had to do it in Frieda's case. In spite of her childish 
mind etc. 

P. 131, 1 . 12. 

Now he had nothing to do but wait here. Klamm had 
to come past here ; he would perhaps be a little tajjen 
aback to see K. here, but he would be all the more 
likely to listen to him, perhaps even to answer him. 
One needn't take the prohibitions here too seriously. 
This, then, was the point K. had reached. True, he was 
only allowed to enter the tap-room, but nevertheless 



THE CASTLE 


413 

here he was, right in the courtyard, standing only a pace 
away from Klamm's sledge, soon to be face to face with 
him, and was enjoying his food better than anywhere else. 

Suddenly light came on everj^where, the electric li^ht 
was burning indoors in the passagfe and on the stairs, 
outside over all the entrances, and the expanse of snow 
made it seem more brilliant still. All this was dis- 
agreeable to K., he stood there, as ft were exposed, on the 
spot that had up to now been so peacefully dark, but on 
the other hand this seemed to signify that now RIainm 
would appear, of course it could have been assumed all 
along that he could not grope his way down the stairs 
in the dark in order to make K.'s task easier. Un- 
fortunately it was not Klamm who came first, bur the 
landlord, followed by the landlady, they came, slightly 
stooping, out of the depths of the passage, they too could 
have been expected, of course they put in an appearance 
in order to take leave of such a guest. This, however, 
made it necessary for K. to withdraw a little into the 
shadow, so giving up the good view he had had of the 
staircase. 

P. 136, 1 . 3. 

K. saw no reason to do that, let them abandon him. 
there almost arose new hope ; the fact that the horses 
were being unyoked was, admittedly, a sad sign, but the 
gate was still there, open, could not be locked, was a 
perpetual promise and a perpetual expectation. Then he 
heard someone on the stairs again, cautiously and hastily 
he *^tepped forward, setting one foot inside the hall, 
instantly prepared to step back, and looked up. To his 
amazement it was the landlady from the Bridge Inn. 
She came down thoughtfully but calmly, regularly 
lifting her hand from the banisters and putting it down 



THE CASTLE 


414 

again. She said good-evening to him pleasantly when 
she arrived at the bottom ; here on alien territory the 
old quarrel apparently did not have to be kept up. 

What did K. care for the gentleman I Let him go 
away, the faster the better ; it was a victory for K., only 
unfortunately one that could not be exploited, when at 
the same time the sledge went away, which he sadly 
watched going. If,'^he exclaimed, turning round to the 
gentleman with sudden resolution, '' if I go away from 
here now, instantly, is the sledge permitted to come 
back ? ** While he was saying this K. did not believe 
he was giving way to a compulsion-— otherwise he would 
not have done it — but felt as if he were renouncing 
something in favour of a weaker person and as if he were 
entitled to be slightly pleased about his own good deed. 
True, from the gentleman's hectoring answer he did at 
once realise in what a state of emotional confusion he 
must be, if he believed he was acting of his own free 
will ; of his own free will, since he was at this moment, 
after all, invoking the gentleman's injunction. The 
sledge is permitted to come back," the gentleman said, 
" but only if you come along with me instantly, without 
delay, without making any conditions, without going 
back on it. Well, how about it ? I ask for the last time. 
I assure you, it is not really my function to keep order 
here in the courtyard." " I am going," K. said, " but 
not with you ; I am going through the gate here " — he 
pointed to the big gate of the courtyard — " into the 
street I " " Very well," the gentleman said, again with 

that tormenting mixture of indulgence and harshpess, 
" then I shall go that way too. But now look sharp." 

The gentleman came back to K., they walked side by 
side across the middle of the courtyard, over the un- 
trodden snow ; looking back for a moment, the gentleman 



THE CASTLE 


415 


made a sign to the driver, who once more drove up ro 
the entrance, once more climbed up on to the box, and 
doubtless resumed his waiting. But so, to the gentle- 
man's annoyance, did K., for scarcely was he outside 
the courtyard than he stopped a^ain. “ You are in- 
sufferably obstinate," the gentleman said. But K., who. 
the further away he was from the sledge, the witness of 
his crime, felt more and more dt ease, more and more 
firmly linked with his goal, more nearly the gentleman’s 
equal, indeed even in a certain sense superior to him, 
turned right round to face him and said ; “ Is that 

true ? Aren't you trying to deceive me ? Insullcrably 
obstinate ? I wish for nothing better." 

At this moment K. felt a faint tickling at the back of 
his neck, tried to brush off whatever caused it, struck 
out backwards with his hand, and turned round. The 
sledge ! K. must have been still in the courtyard and 
already the sledge had driven of], soundless in the deep 
snow, without bells, without lights, had now skimmed 
past K., and the driver had for fun flicked K. will) the 
whip. The horses — noble beasts that he had not been 
able to appreciate properly while they stood w-aitmg — 
were already turning in the direction of the Castle, 
wheeling sharply, with a great yet easy tightening of all 
their muscles and without slowing up ; no sooner had 
one become aware of what was happening than it had 
all disappeared in the darkness. 

The gentleman pulled out his watch and said rcproacli- 
ful^ : " And that makes two hours Klamm has had to 
wait." "On my account?" K. asked "Well, yes, 
of course," the gentleman said. " You mean he can t 
endure the sight of me ? " K. asked. " Yes," the gentle- 
mart said, " it is something he cannot endure. But now 
I am going home," he added. " You simply cannot 



THE CASTLE 


416 

imagine how much work I have waiting for me there ; 
I am, you see, Klamm*s local secretary. Momus is my 
name. Klamm is a tremendous worker, and those who 
are in close contact with him have to emulate him, in 
accordance with their powers.'* The gentleman had 
become very talkative, indeed he would probably have 
enjoyed answering all sorts of questions from K., but K. 
remained dumb, he only seemed to be closely scrutinising 
tlie secretary's face, as though he were trying to discover 
a law according to which a face had to be formfcd so that 
Klamm could endure it. But he found nothing and 
turned away, taking no notice of the secretary's farewell 
and pausing only to watch him elbowing his way into 
the courtyard through a cavalcade of people who were 
coming out, evidently Klamm's servants. These people 
were walking in twos, but otherwise without keeping in 
rank or in step, chatting and now and then putting their 
heads together as they passed K. The gate was slowly 
closed after them. K. felt a great need of warmth, of 
light, of a friendly word, and probably all this was waiting 
for him at the school, but he could not help feeling that 
he would not find the way home in his present condition, 
quite apart from the fact that he was now standing in a 
street he did not know. Besides, his goal was not 
sufficiently alluring ; when he pictured to himself in the 
fairest colours eveiyThing that he would find on his 
arrival home, he realised that to-day it would not suffice 
him. Well, he could not stay here, and so he pressed 
on again. 

P. 148, 1 . 14. 

K. was not afraid of the landlady's threats. The hopes 
with which she was trying to ensnare him meant h’tde 
to him, but the protocol was now beginning to be alluring 



THE CASTLE 


417 

to him, after all. Yet the protocol was not wiiiiout 
bigniticance ; not in the sense in which she meant it, 
hut in a general sense, the landlady was right in saying 
that K. must -not give up anything. That had always 
been K.'s opinion too, whenever he* had not happened to 
be weakened by disappointment, as he had been to-day 
after his experience in the afternoon. But now he w'as 
gradually recovering, the landlady" s attacks were giving 
him new strength, for even though she kept on ceaselessly 
talking a&out his ignorance and untcachabiliry, the mere 
fact of her agitation proved how important it was 10 her 
to teach him, him of all people ; and even though she 
tried to humiliate him by the manner in which she 
answered him, nevertheless, the blind zeal with which 
she did so was evidence of the power that his little 
questions had over her. Was he to give up this inlluencc ? 
And h s influence on Momus was perhaps still stronger ; 
true, 'Moinus talked little, and when he did talk, he 
liked to shout, but was this taciturnity nor caution, 
did he not wish, say, to be sparing w'ith his auihoiity, 
was it not for this purpose that he had brought the 
landlady with him, the lady who, since she liad no 
official responsibility to bear, was not tied, and, hei 
attitude being conditioned only by whatever K. s atiitudi 
happened to be, would try, now with sweet, now with 
bitter, words to lure him into the snares of the record 
And what were the facts of the situation where this 
protocol was concerned ? Certainly it did not extend as 
for as Klamm, but was there no work for K. before 
Khftnm, on the way to Klamm ? Was nor precisely this 
afeeifnoon proof of the fact that anyone who believed he 
could, say, reach Klamm by taking a leap m the dark 
was after all seriously underestimating the distance 
sepaftting him from Klamm 7 If it was at all possible to 

14 



THE CASTLE 


418 

reach Klamm, then only seep by step, and admittedl); 
on this way there were also to be found, for instance, 
Momus and the landlady ; was it not only these two, 
after all, at least outwardly, who had to-day kept K. 
from Klamm ? First the landlady, who had annooinced 
K/s arrival, and then Momus, who had looked out of 
the window to make sure it was K. coming and who had 
instantly issued the necessary orders so that even the driver 
was informed that the departure could not take place 
before K. had gone and who had therefore, at ‘‘that time 
incomprehensibly to K., reproachfully complained that to 
judge by all appearances it might yet be a very long time 
before K. went away. In this way, then, everything had 
been arranged, although, as the landlady had almost had 
to admit, it was not Klamm*s sensitiveness, about whicli 
people enjoyed spreading stories, that could be an 
obstacle to K.^s being admitted to his presence. Who 
knows what would have happened if the landlady and 
Momus had not been K."s antagonists or at least had not 
dared to show that antagonism ? It was possible and 
probable that even then K. would not have got to Klamm, 
new obstacles would have appeared, there was perhaps an 
inexliaustible supply of them, but K. would have had the 
satisfaction of having organised everything properly to 
the best of his knowledge, whereas to-day he should have 
been on his guard against the landlady's interference and 
yet had done nothing to protect himself from it. But K. 
only knew of the mistakes he had made ,* how they 
might have been avoided he did not know. His first 
intention, when confronted with Klamm's letter, that of 
becoming an ordinary, unnoticed workman in the village, 
had been very sensible. But he had necessarily had to 
abandon it when Barnabas’s deceptive appearance «had 
caused him to believe he could get into the Casfle as 



THE CASTLE 


419 

easily as one can get to the top of a hill, say, on a hirlc 
Sunday walk, more indeed, that he was positively being 
encouraged to do so by the smile, by the look in the eyes, 
of that messenger. And then immediately, before there 
was any time to think, Frieda had come,' and with her 
the belief, which it was impossible to give up entirely 
even to-day, that through her , mediation an almoM 
physical relationship to Klamm, a relationsliip so close 
that it |imounted almost to a whispering form of 
communication, had come about, of which for the present 
only K. knew, which however needed only a little 
intervention, a word, a glance, in order to reveal itself 
primarily to Klamm, but then too to everyone, as some- 
thing admittedly incredible which was nevcrtlielcss. 
through the compulsion of life, the conijnilsion of the 
loving embrace, a matter of course. Well, it had not 
been so simple and, instead of temporarily contenrinv» 
himself with being a workman, K. had for a long nine 
been groping about and was still groping about, ufi- 
paricntly and vainly, for Klamm. But nevertheless, 
almost without his doing anything about it, other 
possibilities had presented themselves : at home the 
small position as janitor of the school — pcrhajvs it was 
not the right job, regarded in the light of K.'s own wislies, 
being too closely modelled on K.'s particular circum- 
stances, too striking, too provisional, too much dependent 
on the graciousness of many superiors, ahovc ail on that 
of the teacher, but it was nevertheless a solid start mg- 
poyit, and, besides, the deficiencies of the position were 
beiog much improved through the imminent maniage, 
which K. had hitherto scarcely couched on in his thoughts, 
but the whole importance of which now' became 
SLirpiTisingly clear to him for the first time. Wliat, after 
all, was he without Frieda ? A nonentity, staggerirtg 



THE CASTLE 


420 

along after silkily shining will-o'-the-wisps of the sort 
that Barnabas was, or that girl from the Castle. With 
Frieda's love, admittedly, he was still not conquering 
Klamm as by a coup-de-tnain, only in a state of delusion 
had he believed that or almost known it, and even though 
these expectations were still present, as though no 
refutation by facts could make any difference to them, 
nevertheless he no longer meant to count on them in his 
plans. Nor did he need them any more ; by the 
marriage he was gaining another, better kind of security — 
member of the community — rights and duties — no longer 
a stranger — , then he only needed to beware of the 
complacency of all these people, an easy matter with the 
Castle before his eyes. What was more difficult was 
knuckling under, humble work among humble people ; 
he wanted to begin by submitting to the taking of the 
statement. Then he changed the subject, perhaps he 
could get at the truth from another side ; as though there 
had not yet been any difference of opinion, he asked 
calmly : All that has been written about the after- 

noon ? All these papers are concerned with that ? " 
" All of them," Momus said pleasantly, as though he 
had been waiting for this question, "it is my work." 
If one has the strength to look at things unceasingly, so 
to speak without blinking, one sees a great deal ,* but 
if one falters only once and shuts one's eyes, everything 
instantly slips away into darkness. " Couldn't I have a 
look into them ? " K. asked. Momus began leafing 
through the papers as if he were looking to see whether 
there was anything that could be shown to K., theffhe 
said : " No, I'm afraid it's not possible." " fhe 

impression this makes on me," K. said, " is that there 
must be things there that I could refute." " Tly’ngs 
you could make great endeavours to refute," Momus 



THE CASTLE 


421 

said. ** Yes, there are such things there.** And he rook 
up a blue pencil and, smiling, heavily underlined several 
lines. ** I am not curious,’* K. said. “ Just go on 
underlining things, Mr. Secretary ^ as long as you like. 
No matter what hideous things you have written down 
about me, at your leisure, all unchecked. What is filed 
in the records does not bother mij. I was only thinking 
that there might be a number of things there that 
would be instructive for me, which would show me how 
an experienced official of long standing arrives at a 
critical view of me, honestly and in detail. Thar is 
something I should have liked to read, for I always like 
to learn, I do not like making mistakes, I do not like 
causing annoyance.” ” And I like playing the innocent,” 
the landlady said. You just do what tlic Secretary 
tells you and your wishes will be partly granted. IVoin 
the questions you will at least indirectly learn something 
of what is in the protocol and through your answers you 
will be able to influence the spirit of the whole protocol.” 
”I have too much respect for the Secretaiy,” K. said, 
” to be able to believe that he would reveal 10 me against 
his will, through his questions, whatever he has once 
decided to conceal from me. Besides, I have no desire 
to provide a certain, even though pcrliaps only formal, 
substantiation of points that are perhaps iiuomct, 
accusing me incorrectly, by answering at all and allowing 
my answers to be incorporated into the hostile tex't. 

Momus glanced up reflectively at the . 

” Well then, let’s pack up our papers,” he said. We 
have delayed long enough, the Land Surveyor cannot 
complain of our being impatient. What w'as it t u aiu 
Surveyor said? ‘I have too much respect for the 
Se«*etary, and so on.’ So the excessively great respect that 
he has for me renders him speechless. C.ould I diminish 



THE CASTLE 


422 

it, I should get the answers. Unfortunately, however, 1 
must increase it by confessing that these files do not 
require his answers, since they are not in need either of 
supplementation or of emendation, but that he himself 
is very much in need of the protocol, and indeed both of 
the questions and of the answers and that if I tried to 
persuade him to give h^s answers this was only in his own 
interest. Now, however, when I leave this room, the 
protocol also passes out of his reach for ever and will never 
be opened before him again.*' The landlady nodded 
slowly to K., and said : ''I knew this of course, but I was 
only permitted to hint at it, and did do my best to hint at 
it, but you did not understand me. There in the courtyard 
you waited in vain for Klamm, and here in the protocol 
you have made Klamm wait in vain. How muddled, 
how muddled you are I " The landlady had tears in her 
eyes. Well," K. said, influenced above all by these 
tears, " for the moment, after all, the Secretary is still 
here, and so is the protocol." " But I am going now," the 
secretary said, stuffing the papers into the brief-case and 
standing up. " Are you going to answer now, at last, 
Land Surveyor ? " the landlady asked. " Too late," the 
secretary said, " it's high time for Pepi to open the gate, 
it’s long past the hour for the servants." For a long time 
now there had been a knocking at the gate, Pepi was 
standing there with her hand on tlie bolt, waiting only 
for the end of the interview with K., in order then to 
open it immeciiately. " All right, open the gate, my 
dear ! " the secretary said, and through the gate there 
came pushing, and elbowing each other aside, men of the 
sort K. already knew, in their earth-coloured uniform. 
They looked angr}^ because they had had to wait for 
so long, they took no notice of K., the landlady, and'rhr 
secrctar)^ pushing past them as though they were onl)’ 



THE CASTLE 


42 J 

customers like themselves, ir was fortunate that the 
secretary already had the papers in the brief-case under 
his arm, for the little table was knocked over the 
moment the crowd came in and ^it had not yet been 
stood up again, the men keeping on stepping over it, 
solemnly, as though it must be" like this. Only the 
secretary's beer-glass had instantjj^ been saved, one of 
them had appropriated it, with a jubilant, gurgling cry, 
and had Jiurried with it to Pepi, who, hov^■e^'er^ had 
already quite vanished in the cro\Nd of men. All that 
could be seen was how around Pepi upstrerched arms wi re 
pointing at the clock on the wall, ir was being conveved 
to her what a great wrong she had done these people by 
opening so late. But although she was nor to blame for 
the delay, for which actually K. vas to blame, even 
though not of his own will, Pepi did nor seem to be 
capable of justif)'ing herself to them, ir was reallv 
difficult for one of her youth and inexperience to cope 
V irh these people in a more or less rational way. I low 
f'rieda, in Pepi’s place, would have lashed out and shaken 
them all off ! But Pepi did not emerge from among them 
at all ; this, however, did not exactly suit the people, 
vho above all wanted to be served with beer. But the 
ciowd could not control itself and deynned itself of the 
very pleasure for which all of them were so greedy. 
Always the throng, heaving this way and that, kept 
pushing the slight girl about with it, and though IVpi 
iu'ld out bravely, in that she did nor scream, there was 
not]nng to be seen or heard of her. And always more 
people kept coming in through the gate ol the courtyard, 
the room was now packed, the secretary^ could not go 
away, he could not get either to the door into the hall 
or the door into the courtyard, the three of them 
stood jammed up close together, the landlady holding rhfe 



THE CASTLE 


424 

secretary's arm, K. opposite them and pressed up against 
the secretary in such a way that their faces were almost 
touching. But neither the secretary nor the landlady 
was surprised or annoyed about the crowd, they accepted 
it like an ordinary natural phenomenon, trying only to 
guard themselves from being pushed about all too 
violently, leaning bacl(. into the crowd or yielding to the 
current when need be, bowing their heads when it was 
necessary in order to escape from the puffing an^ blowing 
of the men who were all the time discontentedly surging 
about, but apart from that they looked calm and a little 
abstracted. Being as near as he now was to the secretary 
and the landlady and being allied with them, in one 
group, over against the other people in the room, even 
though they did not seem to acknowledge this, K.'s whole 
relation to them in his own mind was changed, all the 
official, the personal element, the element of social 
distinctions, between them, seemed to him to be 
removed or at least for the present suspended. Nor 
could the protocol now be in any way out of K.'s reach. 
"Now you can't get out anyway," K. said to the 
secretary. " No, not for the moment," the latter replied. 
" And how about the protocol ? " K. asked. " That stays 
in the brief-case," Momus said. " I should like to have 
a bit of a look at it," K. said, involuntarily reaching out 
for the case and even getting hold of one end of it. 
" No, no," the secretary said and pulled it away from 
him. " What on earth are you doing ? " the landlady 
said and gave K.'s hand a little slap. " You don't thyik, 
surely, you could get back by force what you have pnee 
lost through frivolity and arrogance? Wicked, dreadful 
man ! Do you really suppose the protocol would still 
have any value once it was in your hands ? It woul/^ be 
a flower plucked in the meadow," " But it woufd be 



THE CASTLE 


425 

destroyed," K. said. " How would it be if now, when 
I am no longer allowed to make a voluntary' statement for 
incorporation in the protocol, I were to set out at least to 
destroy the protocol ? I have a strong inclination to do so/' 
and he now resolutely pulled the case from under the 
secretary's arm and took possession of it. The sccretarv 
let him have it without more ad(>; indeed, he IcK^scncJ 
his hold so quickly that the case would have fallen to the 
floor if had not instantly reached out with his orluT 
hand. " Why only now ? " the secretary asked. “ You 
could have taken it by force at once." " It is force ai^ainsc 
force," K. said. " You have no justification for now 
refusing me the interrogation you previously ofl'ered, or 
at least to let me have a look into the papers. I have 
taken the case only in order to insist on one or the otlier 
of these things." " But as a pledge," the secretary said 
smilingly. And the landlady said : " Taking pletlgcs is 
something he's pretty good at. You've already proved 
that in the files, Mr. Secretary. Couldn't lie be shown 
just that one page ? " " Certainly," Momtis said, " now 
he can be shown it." K. held out the case, the landlady 
rummaged about in it, but evidently could not find the 
page. She stopped searching, saying, in exhaustion, 
only that it must be page ten. Now K. looked for it and 
found it at once, the landlady took it in order to make 
sure that it was the right one ; yes, it was the right one. 
She glanced through it once for her own amusement, the 
secretary, leaning on her arm, reading at the same time. 
Thgn she handed it to K., who read: "The Land 
Surveyor K. first of all had to endeavour to establish 
himlelf in the village. This was not easy, since no one 
needed his work. Nobody, except the landlord of the 
Brirjge Inn, whom he had taken unawares, wanted to 
take' him in, nobody bothered about him— apart froni 

14* 



THE CASTLE 


426 

some jokes on the part of the officials. So he roamed 
about in a seemingly aimless way, doing nothing but 
disturb the peace of the place. In reality however he 
was very busy ; he wa^ on the look-out for an opportunity 
to get a foothold, and soon found one. Frieda, the young 
barmaid in the tap-room at the Herrenhof, believed in 
his promises and let h;^t-self be seduced by him. It is not 
easy to prove the guilt of Land Surveyor K. The fact is 
that one can only sec what tricks he is up to if ^nc forces 
oneself, however distressing it may be, to follow his 
train of thought exactly. In doing so one must not let 
oneself be misled if one finds oneself brought face to face 
with what looks, on the surface, like a piece of un- 
believable wickedness, on the contrar)^ if one has reached 
that stage, then one can be sure of not having gone 
astray, only then has one arrived at the right point. Let 
us take for instance the case of Frieda. It is clear that 
the Land Surveyor docs nor love Frieda and is not 
marrying her for love, lie knows perfectly well that she is 
a plain, insignificant, over scaring girl, with a disreputable 
past into ihe bar^vnin, and he treats her accordingly and 
roams around without bothering about her. That is a 
statement of the position. This now could be interpreted 
in various ways, 10 make K. appear a weak or a stupid 
or a noble or an infamous person. But none of this is in 
fact so. One can arrive at the truth only by exactly 
following in his footsteps, which we have traced here, 
starting with his arrival and continuing up to his affair 
with Frieda. Once the hair-raising truth has been 
discovered, it admittedly still remains necessary to 
accustom oneself to believing it, but there is no other 
choice. 

“ It was out of calculation of the lowest sort thafr K, 
attached himself to Frieda, and he will not let her go as 



THE CASTLE 


4^7 

long as he still has any hope at all that his calculations 
are correct. The fact is he believed that in her he had 
made the conquest of a mistress of the head of the 
department, and that he is therefore in possession of a 
pledge for which he can demand the highest p>nce. His 
bolc endeavour now is to negotiate about this price with 
the head of the department. Sinc^ he is not in the least 
interested in Frieda, and exclusively interested in the 
price, he ^s prepared to make any sort of concession 
regard to Frieda herself, whereas he is certain to he 
stubborn with regard to the price. Though for the 
present he is, apart from the repulsiveness of his assump- 
tions and his ofl'ers, quite harmless, when he realises how 
gravely he has been mistaken and how he has exposed 
himself he may even become extremely unpleasant, of 
course within the limits set by his insignificance.” 

Here the page ended. The only other tiling uas, in 
the margin, a childishly scrawled drawing, a man with a 
girl in his arms. The giiTs face was buried in the man’s 
chest, but the man, who was much the taller, was 
looking over the girFs shoulder at a sheet of paper he liad 
in his hands and on which lie was joyfully inscribing 
some figures. When K. glanced up from this page he 
was standing in the middle of the room alone u'lrh the 
landlady and the secretary. The landlord had come and 
had evidently restored order meanwhile. With lus 
hands raised appeasingly, in his usual urbane manner, he 
walked along the walls, where the men had alread\’ settled 
do\yn, as well as they could, each of them with his beer, 
on the barrels or on the floor beside them. Now too n 
coura be seen that there were nor so overwlielnungly 
many of them as it had at first seemed ; it had only 
sedtiied so bad because they had all been scrambling 
around Pepi. There w^as a small wild jroiip of mcr 



THE CASTLE 


428 

who had not yet been served still standing round Pepi ; 
Pepi must have achieved superhuman feats in the most 
difficult circumstances, true, there were still tears 
coursing down her cheeks, her beautiful plait had come 
undone and was tousled, her dress was actually torn open 
at the bodice, so that her shift showed, but, unconcerned 
about herself, probab^ influenced, too, by the landlord's 
presence, she worked away untiringly at the beer-taps. 
At the touching sight of it K. forgave her all fhe annoy- 
ance she had caused him. “ Yes, the page," he said 
then, put it back into the case and handed the case to 
the secretary. " Excuse the hastiness with which I took 
the case from you. It was partly the crowd and also the 
excitement that were to blame. Well, I am sure you do 
excuse it. Apart from that, both you and the landlady 
here have a special capacity for arousing my curiosity, as I 
must frankly confess. But the page has disappointed 
me. It is really a very ordinary meadow- flower, as the 
landlady said. Well, regarded as work, it may of course 
have a certain official value, but for me it is merely 
gossip, trumped-up, empty, sad, womanish gossip, indeed, 
the writer of it must have had a woman to help him. 
Well, I assume there is at any rate still enough justice 
here for me to be able to lodge a complaint about this 
piece of handiwork with some department or other, but 
I shall not do that ; not only because it is too pitiable, 
but because I am grateful to you. You contrived to 
make the protocol seem a little queer to me, but now it 
has completely lost its queerness. All that still sti;ikes 
me as queer is the fact that such things should ever 
have been meant to be made the basis of an interrogation 
and that even Klamm's name should have been misused 
for that purpose." " If I were your enemy," the Itfhd- 
lady said, " I could not have wished for anything better 



THE CASTLE 


429 

than that you should take such a view of this 
“ Ah yes,’' K. said, you are not my enemy. For my 
sake you even let Frieda be slandered.” ” You don’t 
really mean to say you believe that w'jiat it says tlicrc is my 
opinion of Frieda I ” die landlady exclaimed. ” It's 
your own opinion of her. Thar is simply the way yon 
look down on the poor child.” Jo this K. made no 
reply, for this now was nothing but abuse. The sccretaiy' 
did his b^t to conceal his delight at having the bricFcase 
restored to him, but could not do so ; he gazed at the 
case, smiling, as though it were not his own but a new 
one that he had just been presented with and which he 
could not gaze his fill of. As though it radiated some 
special, beneficial warmth, he held it clutched to his 
chest. He even took out the page K. had read, on the 
pretext of putting it back more tidily, and read it once 
again. Only this reading, during which he hailed each 
word with the happy air of one greeting a dear long-lost 
friend surprisingly encountered, seemed to assure him 
that he had really regained possession of the protocol 
for good. He would really have liked to show it to the 
landlady too so that she could also read it again. K. left 
the two of them to each other, he scarcely glanced at 
them, there was far too great a discrepancy het ween the 
importance they had up till now had for him and their 
present insignificance. How they stood there together, 
those two collaborators, each helping the other with 
their miserable secrets i 

P. 171, 1 . 23. 

*1 know,” Frieda said suddenly, ” it would be belter 
for you if I left you. But it would break my heart if I 
ha<!Fto do it. And yet I would do it, if it were possible, 
but It is not possible, and I am glad of it, at any rate 



THE CASTLE 


430 

it is not possible here in the village. Just as the 
assistants can't go away either. It's no use your hoping 
you've driven them away for good I " ** Frankly, tliat’s 

what I do hope," K.^ said, without taking any notice of 
Frieda’s other remarks, some feeling of uncertainty 
prevented him from doing so, the weak hands and wrists 
now slowly working \^t the coffee-mill seemed to him 
more sad than ever. " The assistants aren't coming back 
any more. And what are these impossibilitjes you're 
talking about ? " 

Frieda had stopped working. She looked at K. with a 
gaze blurred by tears. " Dearest," she said, " understand 
me rightly. It is not I who have ordained all these 
things, 1 am explaining it to you only because you insist 
and because in this way too I can justify a number of 
things about my own behaviour that you cannot otherwise 
understand and cannot reconcile w'ith my love for you. 
As a stranger you have no right to anything here, perhaps 
here we are particularly strict or unjust towards strangcis, 
1 don’t know, but there it is, you have no riglit u> 
anything. A local person, for instance, when he need.s 
assistants, takes such people on, and when he is grown 
up and wants to marry, he takes himself a wife. The 
authorities have a great deal of influence in these matters 
too, but in the main everyone is free to decide for himseli. 
But you, as a stranger, have to make do with what you 
arc given ; if it pleases the authoiitics to do so, they 
give you assistants, if it pleases tlicm to do so, tliey give 
you a wife. Even this, of course, is not mercl)’ arbitrary, 
but It is a matter solely for the authorities to decide, and 
this means that the reasons for the decision remain 
hidden. Now you can perhaps refuse \\'hat you aic 
given, I don’t know for sure, perhaps \'ou can rchf^e . 
but if you have once accepted it, then upon it anJ 



THE CASTLE 


consequently upon you too there weighs the pressure of 
the authorities ; only if the authorities so \s’ill can it be 
taken from you again, and in no other manner. So I 
have been told by the landlady, from whom I have all 
this, :she said she must open my eyes for me about various 
things before I marry. And she particularly emphasised 
the fact that everyone who knows about such things 
advises the stranger to put up with such presents once 
they have been accepted, since one can never succeed in 
shaking them off; the only thing one can aclueve, she 
said, is to turn the things given, which at the very woist do 
still have a trace of friendliness about them, into hfe-long 
enemies that can never be shaken ofl. Tliat is what the 
landlady told me, I am only repeating what she said; the 
landlady knows everj’thing, and she must be believed." 

" Some things she says can be believed," K. said. 

P. 175, 1 . 20. 

" It isn't the cat that frightens me, but m)- bad 
conscience. And if the cat drops on me, J feel as il 
someone had poked me in the chest, ns a sign that I've 
been seen through." Frieda let go of the curLam, shut 
the inner window, and pleadingly drew R. 10 wards the 
sack of straw. " And it isn't the cat 1 go looking for then 
uith the candle, but it's you I want to wake quickly. 
That's how it is, darling, darling." " They are mes- 
sengers of Klamm’s," K. said, drawing I-rieda closer to 
liim and kissing her on the nape of her neck, so that a 
tremor ran through her and she leapt up, throwing 
hci'self on him, and both then slid ro the floor ami 
fun^bled at each other hastily, breathlessly, anxiously, as 
though each w'ere trjung to hide in the other, as though 
tl^' pleasure they were experiencing belonged to sonu 
tiurd person whom they were depiiNing of ir. Shall i 



THE CASTLE 


432 

open the door ? K, asked. “ Will you run to them ? 

No ! " Frieda screamed, clutching his arm. ‘‘ I don't 
want to go to them, I want to stay with you. Protect 
me, keep me with you.'* But,'' K. said, ** if they are 
messengers of Klamm's, as you say they are, whar help 
can doors be, what help can my protection be, and if they 
could be of help, woul^such help really be a good thing ? " 

I don't know who they are," Frieda said. " I call 
them messengers because after all Klamm is your 
superior and the department sent the assistants* to you ; 
that’s all I know, nothing else. Dearest, take them back 
again, don't sin against him who perhaps sent them." 
K. freed himself from Frieda's grip and said : " The 
assistants are going to stay outside, I don't want them in 
my proximity any more. What ? You suggest those 
two have the capacity to lead me to Klamm ? I doubt 
that. And if they could, I should not have the capacity 
to follow them ; indeed, the mere fact of their proximity 
would rob me of the capacity to find my way about here. 
They confuse me and, as I now discover, you too, 
unfortunately. I have given you the choice between 
myself and them, you have chosen me, now leave 
everything else to me. This very day I hope to receive 
decisive news. They began it all by drawing you away 
from me, whether guiltily or innocently makes no differ- 
ence to me. Do you really think, Frieda, I should have 
opened the door for you, making the way free for you ? " 

P. 202, 1 . 7. 

Incidentally, it had looked as though the work were a 
pleasure to Frieda, as though she especially enjoyed tfiny 
sort of dirty and strenuous work, any work that taxed 
her strength to the utmost, keeping her from thinking 
and dreaming. ^ 



THE CASTLE 


4M 

P. 202, 1.51 (immediately after passage now first printed, 
pp. 40 Z- 4 ). 

Now the candles were extinguished indoors, and at the 
same instant Gisa appeared at the front door ; evidently 
she had left the room while there was still light there, 
for she attached much importance to respectability. 
Schwarzer soon followed, and noV they set out on their 
way, which to their pleased surprise was clear of snow. 
When they reached K., Schwarzer slapped him on the 
back. If you keep things tidy in the house here,’' he 
said, ‘‘ you can count on me. But I have heard grave 
complaints about you, on account of your behaviour this 
morning.” ” He’s improving,” Gisa said, without 
i^lancing at K. or stopping at all. ” I must say, the 
fellow certainly needs to.” Schwarzer said and hurried 
on in order not to lose contact with Gisa. 

P. 224. 1 . 30. 

” Now I don't understand you, Olga,” K. said. ” I 
only know that 1 envy Barnabas for all these tilings tliai 
strike you as so terrible. I admit it would be better still 
if everything he has were established beyond doubt, 
but even if he is in the most worthless of all the ante- 
chambers of the offices, still, he is at least there in that 
ante-chamber ; how far beneath him he has left, for 
instance, the chimney-corner in which we are sitting. It 
surprises me that though you can pretend to appreciate 
this, in order to comfort Barnabas, you don t really seem 
to understand it in your own mind. At the same time- 
and this makes it even more difficult for me to undcr- 
st;|nd you — you seem to be the one who spurs Barnabas 
on in all his endeavours, something, by the way, that I 
should never even have dreamt of supposing after that 
first evening when we met.” You misjudge me, O ga 



THE CASTLE 


434 

said, *' I don^t do any spurring, oh no ; if what Barnabas 
docs were not necessary I should be the first who would 
try to hold him back and keep him here always. For 
isn't It time for him to marry and set up house for 
liiinsclf ? And instead of that he is frittering his powers 
away between his handicraft and being a messenger, 
standing in front of th^ desk up there, on the look-out 
for a glance from the official who looks like Klamm, and 
in the end gets an old dusty letter that is no good to 
anyone and only causes confusion in the world." " But 
that is yet another and quite different question," K. said. 
" The fact that the errands on which Barnabas is sent 
arc worthless or harmful may be grounds for a charge 
against the department and may, furthermore, be a very 
bad thing for those to whom such messages are sent, as, 
lor instance, for me, but after all it does no harm to 
Barnabas, he merely carries the messages to and fro 
according to orders, often not even knowing what is in 
them, himself remaining beyond reproach as an official 
messenger, just as it is the wish of you all." " Well, 
yes," Olga said, " perhaps it is like that. Sometimes 
when I sit here alone — Barnabas at the Castle, Amalia in 
the kitchen, our poor parents dozing over there, I take up 
Barnabas’s cobbling work and set about it with mv 
extremely inexpert hands, then I lay it down again and 
begin thinking, helpless, because I am alone and I am 
very far from having the understanding to cope with these 
things — then everything merges with everything else m 
my mind, not even the fear and the worries remain 
distinct." " And why then do they despise you all ?*" 
K. asked and remembered the ugly impression tl^is 
stocky, broad-backed family had made on him the ven^ 
first evening, all gathered round the table by the light of 
the little oil-lamp, one back beside the other and the t'*\o 



THE CASTLE 


4^5 

old people with their little heads almost drooping into 
the soup, waiting to be fed. How revolting all that had 
been, and all the more revolting because this impression 
could not be explained by derails^, for though one listed 
the details in order to have something to hold on to, they 
were not bad, it was something else about it all that one 
could not put a name to. Only^^rrer K. had discovered 
various things here in the village that had made him 
cautious about first impressions, and not only about first 
impressions either, but about second and even later 
impressions, and only after the entity this family was had 
ior liim dissolved into separate persons whom he could 
partially understand but with whom, above all, he could 
led, as with friends, such as he had orheruise not found 
anywhere here in this village- -only now did that old 
revulsion begin to fade, but it had not yet completely 
gone. The parents in their corner, the little oil-lamp, 
the room itself — it was not easy to endure all this calmly, 
.md one needed to get some gift in return, such as Olga’s 
Storys was, in order to reconcile oneself to it a little, and 
then only seemingly and only provisionally. And 
thinking of this he added : “I am now convinced that 
you are all being done an injustice, I may as well say that 
at once. But, though I don’t know the reason, it must be 
difficult not to do you an injustice. One must be a 
stranger in my special situation in order to remain free of 
this prejudice. And I myself was for a long time in- 
fluenced by it, so much influenced by it that the mood 
f'revailing where you are concerned — it is not only 
contempt, there is fear mixed with it too — seemed a 
matter of course to me, I did not think about it, I did 
not enquire into the causes, I did not in the least try to 
defend you all, indeed the whole thing had nothing to do 
wirti me. Now however I see it quite differently. Now 



THE CASTLE 


436 

I believe tliat the people who despise you arc not merely 
hushing up the causes* but really do not know them 
one has to get to know you all* particularly you* Olga* 
in order to free oneself from the prevailing delusion. 
What is held against you is obviously nothing but the 
fact that you are aiming higher than others ; the fact 
that Barnabas has beco'h^e a Castle messenger* or is trying 
to become one* is something for which people bear you a 
grudge ; in order to avoid having to admire you, they 
despise you, and they do it with such intensity that even 
you yourselves are defeated by it. For what else are 
your worries, your timidity, your doubts, but the 
consequence of that universal contempt ? " Olga smiled, 
and she gazed at K. in a way that was so shrewd and 
bright-eyed that he was almost disconcerted, it was as 
chough he had said something wildly mistaken and as 
though Olga must now begin arguing with him and 
clearing up the mistakes and as though she were very 
happy about this task. And the question why everyone 
was against this family seemed to K. to be again unsolved 
and to be very much in need of a clear answer. “ No," 
Olga said, " that is not the way it is, our situation is not 
so favourable, you arc trying to make up for having 
hitherto not defended us against Frieda and now you are 
defending us far too much. We do not aim higher than 
the rest. Do you think that wanting to be a Castle 
messenger is a high aim ? Anyone who can run about 
and memorise a few words of a message has the capacity 
CO become a Castle messenger. Nor is it a paid job. 
The request to be taken on as a Castle messenger seems 
to be regarded much like the begging of little childKbn 
who have nothing to do* who pester the grown-ups to 
give them some errand or other, to let them do some job 
or other, everything only for the honour of it and for ehc 



THE CASTLE 


437 

sake of the job itself. So it is here too, only with the 
difference that there are not many who push themselves 
forward and that he who is really or apparently taken on 
is not treated kindly, as a child would be, but is tomiented. 
No, for that, you see, nobody envies us, people are rather 
more inclined to pity us because of it, for in spite of all 
hostility there is still a spark of /ity to be found here 
and there. Perhaps in your heart too — for what else 
could draw you to us ? Solely Barnabas’s messages ? I 
can’t believe that. I don’t suppose you have ever really 
attached much importance to them, you have insisted on 
them merely out of pity for Barnabas or at least to a 
\’ery great extent for that reason. And you have not been 
unsuccessful in this aim. True, Barnabas stiHers as a 
result of your sublime, unfulfillablc demands, but at rhe 
same time they give him a little pride, a little coniidencc, 
the continual doubts from which he cannot free himself 
up there in the Castle arc to some slight extent refuted 
by your trust, by your continual sympathy. Since you 
have been in the village things go better with him. And 
something of this trust is passed on to the rest of us too ; 
It would be even more if you came to see us more often. 
You hold back, on Frieda’s account, J can understand 
ihat, I said as much to Amalia. But Amalia is so restless, 
for some time now I have sometimes hardly dared to talk 
to her even about the most necessary things. She doesn t 
even seem to listen when one speaks to her, and if she 
does listen she does not seem to understand what is said 
to her, and if she does understand it, she seems to despise 
It.* But all this, after all, she does not do on purpose, and 
onj must not be cross with her ; the more aloof she is, 
the more gently one must treat her. She is as weak as 
she seems to be strong. Yesterday for instance Barnabas 
said chat you would be coming co-day ; knowing Amalia 



THE CASTLE 


438 

2Lb he does he added, as a precaution, that it was only i 
possibility that you would come, it was not yet definite. 
But nevertheless Amalia was waiting for you all day, 
incapable of doing anything else, and only in the evening 
she could nor keep on' her feet any longer and had to lie 
down/* “ Now I understand,** K. said, ** why I mean 
something to you all>,^ctually without any merit of my 
own. We are tied to each other, just as the messenger 
is to him to whom the message is addressed, but no more 
than iliar, you people must not exaggerate ; I aftach too 
nuicli importance to your friendship, especially to yours, 
Olga, to tolerate its being endangered by exaggerated 
expectations ; I mean in the way that you were all almost 
estranged from me through the fact that I hoped for too 
much from you. If a game is being played with you, it is 
not less so with me, tlien it is simply one single game, a 
game that is amazingly all of one piece. From the stories 
)’ou tell me I have even gathered the impression that the 
two messages Barnabas brought me are the only ones 
with whicli lie has been entrusted up to now.** Olga 
nodded. ** I was ashamed to confess it,** she said with 
lowered eyes, “ or I was afraid that then the messages 
would seem to you even more w'orthless than before.’* 
Bur you two,” K. said, you and Amalia, are always 
doing your utmost to make me have less and less con- 
fidence in the messages,** Yes,** Olga said, “ Amalia 
does so, and I imitate her. It is this hopelessness that 
has us all in its grip. We believe the worthlessness of the 
message is so obvious that w^e cannot spoil anything by 
pointing out w^hat is so obvious, that, on the contrary, 
we shall gain more trust and mercy from your sij^e, 
which IS in fact the only thing for which, at bottom, w'e 
hope. Do you understand me ? That is the w^ay our 
minds work. The messages are worthless, there isi no 



THE CASTLE 


4^0 


Strength to be gained from them directly, you are too 
shrewd to let yourself be deceived in this respect, and 
even if we could deceive you, Barnabas would be onlv a 
false messenger, and from falsehoods no salvation could 
come/* And so you are nor frank with me/* K. said, 
not even you are frank with me/* “You still don’t 
understand our extremity,** Olg/said and gazed at K. 
anxiously, ** it is probably our fault, being unaccustomed 
to associating with people, we perhaps repel you, precisely 
through our desperate attempts to attract you. 1 am not 
frank, you say? Nobody can be more frank than J am 
towards you. If I keep ant thing from you, it is only 
from fear of you, and this fear is something I do not 
hide from you, but show quire openly. Take this lear 
from me and you have me urieily and completely. 

“ What fear do you mean ? “ K. asked. ** The lear of 
losing you,** Olga said, *' just rcllecr, for three ye.irs 
Barnabas has been fighting for his appointment, for 
three years we have been waiting and watching lor some 
success in his endeavours, all in vain, not the slightest 
success, only disgrace, torment, time v^'as^ed, threats as to 
the future, and then one evening he comes with a letter, 
a letter to you. * A Land Surveyor has arrived, he set ms 
to have come for our sake. I am to carry all com- 
munications between him and the Castle, Bainahas 
said. * There seem to be important things involved, he 
said. * Of course,* I said, * a Land Surveyor ! I le will 
carry out many jobs, many messages w'lH have to he 
earned to and fro. Now you are a real messenger, soon 
you will be given the oHici.d unilorm.’ ‘ It is possib c. 
Barnabas said ; even he, this hoy who has become such a 
self-tormentor, said : * It is possible.’ That evening we 
'^vvere happy, even Amalia shared in it, in icr own 
trie, she didn't listen to us, but she pulled her stool, on 



THE CASTLE 


440 

which she sat knitting, nearer to us and sometimes glanced 
over at us, as we sat laughing and whispering. Our 
happiness did not last long, it came to an end that same 
evening. Admittedly, ^ it even seemed to increase when 
Barnabas unexpectedly came with you. But even then the 
doubts began, it was an honour for us, of course, that you 
had come, but from ^he very beginning it was also 
disturbing. What did you want, we wondered. Why 
did you come ? Were you really the great man foj* whom 
we had taken you, if you cared to come into our poor 
parlour ? Why did you not stay in your own place, 
waiting for the messenger to come up to you, as it 
became your dignity, sending him away instantly ? Did 
you not take away something of the importance of 
Barnabas’s appointment as a messenger, by the fact that 
you had come ? Besides, though you were foreign in 
)^our dress, you were poorly dressed, and sadly I turned 
this way and that the wet coat that I took off you that 
time. Was it that we were to have bad luck with the 
first recipient of messages, for whom we had yearned for 
so long ? Then, admittedly, we could see that you did 
not lower yourself to our level, you remained by the 
window, and nothing could bring you to our table. We 
did not turn round towards you, but we thought of 
nothing else. Had you come only to test us ? To see 
from what sort of family your messenger came ? Had 
you suspicions of us even on the second evening after 
your arrival } And was the result of the test unfavourable 
for us, that you remained so taciturn, spoke no word 
us, and w'ere in a hurry to get away from us again ? 
Your going away was for us a proof that you despistfd 
not only us but, what was much worse, Barnabas’s 
messages too. We alone were not capable of recognising* 
their true significance, that could be done only by you, 



THE CASTLE 


441 

wHom tHcy directly concerned and to whose profession 
tliey referred. And so it was actually you who taught us 
to doubt , from that evening on Barnabas bc^an to make 
his pd observations up there in tlje office. And whatever 
questions were left open that evening were linnlly 
answered in the morning, when I came out of die stable 
and watched you moving out the Herrenhof with 
Frieda and the assistants, realising that you no longer 
set any. hopes in us andfhad abandoned us. Of course 
I did not say anything to Barnabas about it, he is 
heavily enough burdened with his own worries."' 
‘‘And am I not here again?*' K. said, “keeping 
Frieda waiting and listening to stories about your 
misery as though it were my own? *' “ Yes, you arc 
here,** Olga said, “ and we arc glad of it. The hope that 
you brought us was beginning to grow fainter ; we were 
already greatly in need of your coming again." “ hor me 
too," K. said, ** it was necessary to conic, I see that." 

P. 228, 1 . 4. 

“ And Amalia, of course, did not interfere at all, 
although according to your hints she knows more .ibour 
the Castle than you do ; well, perhaps she is most to 
blame for everything." “ You have an amazing gIMs]^ of 
the whole situation,** Olga said, “ sometimes you help 
me with one word, probably it is because you come from 
abroad. We, on the other hand, with our sad experiences 
and fears, can't help being frightened by every creak of 
tbc floorboards, without being able to help ourselves, 
and if one takes fright, the next one instantly takes fright 
too and even without knowing the proper reason for it. 
In such a manner one can never arrive at a proper 
"judgment. Even if one had once had the ability to think 
everything out — and we women have never had k one 



THE CASTLE 


442 

would lose it under these conditions. What good luck 
it is for us that you have come.** It was the first time 
that K. heard sucli an unreserved welcome here in the 
village, but however ipuch he had felt the want of it 
hitherto and however trustworthy Olga seemed to him, 
he did not like hearing it. He had not come to bring 
luck to anyone ; he wai at liberty to help of his own free 
will, if things turned out that way, but nobody was to 
hail him as a bringer of luck, fanyone who did tjiat was 
confusing his paths, claiming him for matters for which 
he, being thus compelled, was never at their disposal, 
with the greatest good will on his part he could not do 
that. Yet Olga repaired her blunder when she con- 
tinued : “ However, whenever I think I could cast aside 
all my worries, for you w'ould find the explanation for 
everything and the way out, you suddenly say something 
entirely, something painfully, wrong, such as for instance 
this ; that Amalia knows more than anyone else, does 
not interfere and is most to blame. No, K., we can 
never get near to Amalia, and least of all by means of 
reproaches I What helps you to judge everything else, 
your friendliness and your courage, makes it impossible 
for you to form a judgment about Amalia. Before we 
could dare to reproach her we should first of all have to 
have an inkling of how she suflers. Just lately she has 
been so restless, has been concealing so much — and at 
bottom I am sure concealing nothing but her own 
suffering — that I scarcely dare to talk to her even about 
w'hat is most necessary. When I came in and saw you ^n 
quiet conversation with her, I was startled ; in reality 
one cannot talk to her now, then again times come wfi^n 
she is quieter, or perhaps not quieter but only more 
tired, but now it is once again at its worst. She doesn*t 
even seem to listen when one speaks to her, and if ‘she 



THn CASTLE 


44 ^ 

does listen she does not seem to understand what is said 
to her, and if she does understand it, sly: seems to despise 
It. But all this, after all, she does not do on purpose, 
and one must not be a'oss with hy ; the more aloof she 
IS, the more gently one must treat her. She is as weak 
as she seems to be strong. Yesterday, for instance. 
Barnabas said that you would- be coming to-day ; 
knowing Amalia as he docs he added, as a precaution, 
that it \vas only a possibility that you would come, it was 
not yet definite. But, nevertheless, Amalia was waiiini^ 
for you all day, incapable of doing anything else, and 
only in the evening she could not keep on her feet any 
longer and had to he down.” Again what K. heard in 
all this was above all the demands that tins family was 
making on him. One could easily go completely wrong 
about this family if one was nor careful. He was only 
very sorry that he should be having such impossible 
ideas about Olga of all people, thus disturbing the 
intimacy that Olga had been the first to evoke, u^hich was 
very comforting to him, which wms primarily what kept 
him here and for the sake of which lie would have liked 
best to put off his departure indefinitely. “We shall 
find it difficult to agree,” K. said, “ I see that already. 
As yet we have hardly touched on what really matters 
and even now there are contradictions here and ilicre. 
If the two of us were alone, it would not be di/hculf 
to agree, I should soon be of one mind v\'ith you, )'ou are 
unselfish and intelligent ; only W'c are nor alone ; indeed 
we, are not even the main persons, your family is there, 
about which we shall scarcely manage to agree, and 
ab<|ut Amalia we shall certainly not.” “ You condemn 
•‘^malia entirely?” Olga asked. “Without knowing 
ner, you condemn her ? ” “ I do not condemn her, k. 

said, “ nor am I blind to her merits, I even admit that 



THE CASTLE 


444 

I may be doing her injustice, but it is very difficult not 
to do her injustice, for she is haughty and reserved and 
domineering into the bargain ; if she were not also sad 
and obviously unhappy, one could not reconcile onself 
to her at all/* ** Is that all you have against her ? ” 
Olga asked, and now she herself had become sad. ** I 
suppose it*s enough, XK. said and saw only now that 
Amalia was back in the room again, but far away from 
them, at the parents’ table, ft*' There she is,”^K. said, 
and against his will there was in his tone the abhorrence 
of that supper and all who were partaking of it. You 
are prejudiced against Amalia,” Olga said. ” I am,” K. 
said. ” Why am I ? Tell me, if you know. You are 
frank, I appreciate that very much, but you are frank 
only where you yourself are concerned, you believe you 
have to protect your brother and sister by keeping 
silence. That is wrong, I can’t support Barnabas if I 
don’t know everything that concerns him and, since 
Amalia is involved in everything to do with your family, 
everything that concerns Amalia too. Surely you don’t 
want me to undertake something and, as a consequence of 
insufficiently detailed knowledge of the circumstances and 
for that reason only, to ruin everj^thing and damage you 
and myself in a way that is beyond repair.” ” No, K.,” 
Olga said after a pause, ” I don’t want that and there- 
fore it would be better if everything could be left as it 
was,” ” I don’t think,” K. said, ” that that is better, 
I don’t think that it is better for Barnabas to go on 
leading this shadowy existence as an alleged messenger 
and for you all to share this life with him, grown-up 
people feeding on baby-food, I don’t think that thaii is 
better than if Barnabas allies himself with me, lets me 
think out the best ways and means here at my leisure, 
and then, trustfully, no longer relying only on himielf, 



THE CASTLE 


445 

under constant observation, carries out everi thins; biinself, 
arid to his own profit and to mine also penctrarcs furtlier 
into the bureaux or perhaps docs not make any 
but learns to understand and turn^to account everythin^ 
in the room where he already is. I don't think that ihai 
would be bad and not worth a g(id deal of sacrifice. 
Yet it is, of course, also possible^hat I am wrong and 
that precisely what you are keeping back is what" puts 
you in tjie right. Then shall remain good friends in 
spite of everything, I couldn't manage here at all \\ iihout 
your friendship, but then it is unnecessary for me lo 
spend the whole evening here and keep h'rieda waiting, 
only Barnabas's important affair, which cannot be 
postponed, could have justified that." K. was about to 
get up, Olga kept him back. " Did bVicda tell you 
anything about us? " she asked. " Nothing definite." 
" Nor the landlady? " " No, nothing." “ I'hai was 

what I expected," Olga said, " you won't learn anything 
definite about us from anyone in the village, on the other 
hand, everyone — w'hether he knows what it is all about 
or whether he knows nothing and only believes rumours 
going around or invented by himself — everyone will 
somehow try to show in a general way that he despises 
us, obviously he would have to despise himself li he dul 
not do so. That is how it is with Frieda and with 
everyone, but this contempt is only generally and broadly 
directed against us, against the family, and the barb is 
aimed only at Amalia. Especially for this reason too 1 am 
grateful to you, K., for despising neither us nor Amnlia, 
although you are under the general influence. Only \ou 
are jprejud iced, at least against Barnabas and Amalia, the 
fact is nobody can completely escape the influence of the 
v?brld ; but that you are capable of it to sucii an extent 
is a ^reat deal, and my hope is to a large extent based on 



THE CASTLE 


446 

this." " I am not interested in other people's opinions," 
K. said, " and 1 am not curious to know their reasons. 
Perhaps — it would be a bad thing, but it is possible — 
perhaps that is a way in which I shall change when I 
marry and settle dpwn here, but for the present I am 
free, it will not be ^sy for me to keep thij» visit of mine 
to you concealed from Frieda or to justify it to her, but I 
am still free, I can still, if something seems to me as 
important as Barnabas’s affai^, occupy myself ^^ith it as 
exhaustively as I want to, without grav^e qualms. Now, 
however, you will understand why I urge a very quick 
decision : I am still with you, but only, as it were, till 
further nonce, at any moment someone may come and 
letch me, and then I don’t know when I shall be able 
to come again." " But Barnabas isn’t here," Olga said, 
" what can be decided without him ? " "I don’t need 
liim for the time being," K. said, for the time being 
1 need other things. But before I go into that I beg you, 
don’t let yourself be deceived if what I say sounds 
domineering, 1 am no more domineering than I am 
inquisitive, I do not want either to subdue you all or to 
rob you of your secrets, all I want is to treat you the way 
I should like to be treated myself." " How like a 
stranger you are speaking now," Olga said, " you were 
much nearer to us before, were you not ? Your reserva- 
tions arc entirely unnecessaiys I have never doubted 
)'Ou and shall not do so, so don't you do it with regard 
to me either.” " If I speak diflerently from before," 
K. said, " that is because I want to be even nearer to 
you all than before, I want to be at home among you, 
cither I shall attach myself to you in this way or | not 
at all, either we shall make entirely common cause, 
with regard to Barnabas or we shall avoid even evefy 
tlecting, objectively unnecessary contact that w^Duld 



THE CASTLE 


447 

compromise me and perhaps all of you too. To tins 
alliance, as I wish it to be, this alhanct' ^^■Kh the Casrlc 
^ in mind, there exists, admittedly, one' grave obstacle : 
Amalia. And that is why I ask' you first of all : Can 
you speak for Amalia, ansvv'cr for hc^ vouch for her : " 

I can partly speak for her, partly answer for her, Imr I 
cannot vouch for her.*' “ Wo«^t you call her?'’ 
“ That would be the end. You would learn less fio;n 
her than from me. She w(;uld reject any sort of alliance 
and would not tolerate any condition, she would f>ibKl 
even me to answer ; with a skill and ine.vorabihrv that \ o[\ 
still have no idea that she possesses, she w'ould foice \ou 
to break off the discussions and to go and then, then, to i)*' 
sure, when you were outside, she would perhaps collapse 
in a faint. That is what she is like.” “ But w ithnut tier 
everything is hopeless,” K. said. ” without her w’e leniain 
hnlf-w'ay, in uncertainty.” ” Perhaps,” Olga said, ” \ou 
will now be able to estimate Barnabas’s work bettor alter 
all, we two, he and I, work alone; wttliont Amalia it is 
as if we w'ere building a house w iilHuit foundartons.” 

P. 253, 1. 5. 

Had he perliaps after all been oiTicially pumshed on 
account of the allair wurli the letter?” K. asKed. 

Because he completely disappeaied ? ” asl.ed. 

” On the contrary. This complete disapjHarance is a 
reward that the officials allegedly do their utmost to get ; 
after all, dealing with applicants is what is so tormenting 
for them.” ” But Sortini had scarcely had any of that 
sort of work even previously,” K. said. Or was that 
lettjr perhaps also part of that dealing with applicants 
^\yhich so tormented him ? ” ** Please, K., don t asK in 

^h’at manner,” Olga said. ** Since Amalia has been 
here,* you have been difTercnt. What good can such 



THE CASTLE 


448 

questions Whether you ask them seriously or 

jokingly, no on^ can answer them. They remind me of 
Amalia at the beginning of these years of misfortune.. 
She hardly talked at all, but paid attention to everything 
that happened, she was much more attentive than she is 
now, and sometinks she would break her silence after 
all, and then it with some such question, which 
perhaps would shame the questioner, at any rate the 
person questioned, and mostly certainly Sortini too.** 

P. 253, 1 . 30 (continuation of K.*s speech). 

The Castle in itself is infinitely more powerful than 
you are, nevertheless there might still be some doubt 
whether it will win, yet you don*t turn that to account, 
but it is as tliough all your endeavours were aimed at 
establishing the victory of the Castle beyond any doubt, 
that is wliy suddenly in the midst of the fight you begin 
to be afraid without any cause, thus increasing your own 
helplessness." 

P. 3 30, last line but one. (After first sentence of Chapter 

XIX.) 

Sit down somewhere,** Erlanger said ; he himself sat 
down at the desk and put some files, which, after a 
fleeting glance at the covers, he first rearranged, into a 
small attach6-case, similar to the one Biirgel had, but 
w'hich turned out to be almost too small for the files. 
Erlanger had to take out the files that he had already put 
in and try to pack them again differently. " You ought 
to have come long ago,** he said ; he had been unfriendly 
even before, but now he was probably transferring his 
anno}\ance with the obstinate files to K. K., startled 
out of his weariness by the new surroundings and 
Erlanger*s brusque manner, which, allowing for the dtle 
dillerence in dignity, was a little reminiscent of the ‘ 



THE CASTLE 


449 

schoolmaster— outwardly, too, there were litric points of 
resemblance, and he himself was sitting U^c on the chair 
,4ike a schoolboy all of whose schoolmatcs^to right and to 
left were absent that day — ^ansvvered as carcfiill}' as 
possible, beginning by mentioning the fact that Erl.ingcr 
had been asleep, told him that in orC/cr not to disturb 
him he had gone away, then, of course, passed over in 
silence what he had been doing in the meantime, 
resuming Jiis account onI)| with the incident of Ihs 
confusing the doors, and concluded by referring to his 
extraordinary fatigue, which he asked should be taken 
into consideration. Erlanger at once discovered the 
weak point in this answer. “ Queer,** he said, “ I sleep 
in order to be rested for my work, but during the same 
time you are roaming about I don't know where, onl)' 
to make excuses about being tired when the mterrogarion 
is supposed to begin." K. was about to answer, but 
Erlanger stopped him with a gesture. " Your fatigue 
does not seem to diminish your garrulity," lie said. 

Nor was the muttering going on for hours m the next 
room exactly the best way of sliowing consideration lor 
my sleep, to which you allegedly attach so much im- 
portance." Once again K. w'as about to answer, and 
once again Erlanger prevented him. " Anyway, I shall 
not take up much of your time," Erlanger said, " I only 
want to ask a favour of you." Suddenly, however, lie 
remembered something, it now became apparent that he 
had all the time been vaguely thinking of something that 
was distracting him and that the severity with which he 
had spoken to K. had perhaps only been superficial and 
actually produced only by his inattentiveness, and he 
pressed the button of an electric bell on the desk. 
Through a side-door — so Erlanger and his suite occupied 
several rooms — a servant instantly appeared. was 



THE CASTLE 


450 

obviously a ^icadle, one of those of whom Olga had told 
him, he him^df had never seen such a person before. 
He was a fairly small but very broad man, liis face wa<k^ 
also broad and open.^and in it the eyes, never wide open, 
seemed all the imnller. His suit was reminiscent of 
Klamm's suit, though it was worn and fitted badly, this 
was particularly striking in the case of the sleeves, which 
were too short, for the servant had fairly short arms to 
begin with, the suit had dbviously been nijant for a 
still smaller man, probably the servants wore the 
ollicials’ cast-off clothing. That might also contribute 
to the proverbial pride of all the servants ; this one, too, 
seemed to think that by answering the bell he had done 
all the work that could be expected of him, and gazed 
at K. witii an expression as severe as if he had been sent 
for to order K. about. Erlanger, on the other hand, 
waited in silence for the servant to carry out some job or 
other, for which he had summoned him, as a customary 
one to be done without any further specific order. Since 
however, this did not happen, the servant only continuing 
to gaze at K. angrily or reproachfully, Erlanger stamped 
irritably and almost drove K. — once again K. had to 
bear the consequences of annoyance for wdiich he was 
not to blame — out of the room, telling him to wait 
outside for a moment, he would be let in again instantly. 
When he was then called back in a markedly more 
amiable rone, the servant had already gone, the only 
change that K. noticed in the room lay in the fact that 
now a u ooden screen concealed the bed, w'ash-stand,^ and 
wardrobe. “ One has a great deal of trouble wdth the 
servants," Erlanger said, and, coming from his lips, ^ this 
could be taken as an astonishingly confidential remark, il^ 
of course, it w^as not merely soliloquy. " And indefcd 
plenty of trouble and worry on all sides," he conrif.ued 



THE CASTLE 


451 

leaning back in his chair, holding his clenched hsrs tai 
away from himself on the table. “ my chief. 

„ has been a little uneasy during the last If w da)'S, at least 
it seems so to us who live in his proximity and tty to 
work but and interpret every one of l^is utterances. It 
seems so to uc^ that does not mean fie is uneasy— how 
should uneasiness touch him? — but’ we are uneasy, wc 
round about him are uneasy and can hardly conceal it 
from him any more in our#work. This is, of course, a 
state of affairs that, if it is not to cause tiie ^leatesi 
damage — to everyone^ including you — must if possible, 
not be allowed to last a moment longer I Wc haye be en 
searching for the reasons and have discoyeied varunis 
things that might possibly be to blame for it. I'hcie are 
among them the most ridiculous things, wliicli is noi so 
very astonishing, for the extremely ridiculous and the 
extremely serious are not far removed from each other. 
Office life, in particular, is so exhausting that it can only 
be done if all the smallest subsidiary circumstances are 
carefully watched and if possible no change is pei milted 
in this respect. The circumstance, for instance, iliat an 
ink-well has been shifted a hand's-breadtli from its usual 
place may endanger the most important work. To kce}> 
a watch over all this should really be the servants’ ]oh, 
but unfortunately they are so little to be depcnvled on 
that a large part of this work has to be done by us, not 
least by me, who am reputed to have a particularly shaip 
eye for these things. Now, as it happens, this is a very 
delicate, intimate job that could be done in a twinkling 
by the insensitive hands of servants, but which causes me 
a great deal of trouble, is very remote from the rest of 
my w'ork and, by the shifting to and fro that it occasions, 
might very well completely ruin nerves only a little 
weaker than mine are. You understand me ? 
