During these last decades the interest in professional fasting has markedly diminished. It used to pay verywell to stage such great performances under one’s own management, but today that is quite impossible. 
We live in a different world now. At one time the whole town took a lively interest in the hunger artist;from day to day of his fast the excitement mounted; everybody wanted to see him at least once a day; therewere people who bought season tickets for the last few days and sat from morning till night in front of hissmall barred cage; even in the nighttime there were visiting hours, when the whole effect was heightenedby torch flares; on fine days the cage was set out in the open air, and then it was the children’s specialtreat to see the hunger artist; for their elders he was often just a joke that happened to be in fashion, butthe children stood openmouthed, holding each other’s hands for greater security, marveling at him as hesat there pallid in black tights, with his ribs sticking out so prominently, not even on a seat but downamong straw on the ground, sometimes giving a courteous nod, answering questions with a constrainedsmile, or perhaps stretching an arm through the bars so that one might feel how thin it was, and then againwithdrawing deep into himself, paying no attention to anyone or anything, not even to the all-importantstriking of the clock that was the only piece of furniture in his cage, but merely staring into vacancy withhalf-shut eyes, now and then taking a sip from a tiny glass of water to moisten his lips. 

Besides casual onlookers there were also relays of permanent watchers selected by the public, usuallybutchers, strangely enough, and it was their task to watch the hunger artist day and night, three of themat a time, in case he should have some secret recourse to nourishment. This was nothing but a formality,instigated to reassure the masses, for the initiates knew well enough that during his fast the artist wouldnever in any circumstances, not even under forcible compulsion, swallow the smallest morsel of food;the honor of his profession forbade it. Not every watcher, of course, was capable of understanding this,there were often groups of night watchers who were very lax in carrying out their duties and deliberatelyhuddled together in a retired corner to play cards with great absorption, obviously intending to give thehunger artist the chance of a little refreshment, which they supposed he would draw from some privatehoard. Nothing annoyed the artist more than these watchers; they made him miserable; they made his fastseem unendurable; sometimes he mastered his feebleness sufficiently to sing during their watch for as longas he could keep going, to show them how unjust their suspicions were. But that was of little use; theyonly wondered at his cleverness in being able to fill his mouth even while singing. Much more to his tastewere the watchers who sat close up to the bars, who were not content with the dim night lighting of thehall but focused him in the full glare of the electric pocket torch given them by the impresario. The harshlight did not trouble him at all, in any case he could never sleep properly, and he could always drowse alittle, whatever the light, at any hour, even when the hall was thronged with noisy onlookers. He was quitehappy at the prospect of spending a sleepless night with such watchers; he was ready to exchange jokeswith them, to tell them stories out of his nomadic life, anything at all to keep them awake and demonstrateto them again that he had no eatables in his cage and that he was fasting as not one of them could fast. Buthis happiest moment was when the morning came and an enormous breakfast was brought for them, athis expense, on which they flung themselves with the keen appetite of healthy men after a weary night ofwakefulness. Of course there were people who argued that this breakfast was an unfair attempt to bribe thewatchers, but that was going rather too far, and when they were invited to take on a night’s vigil without abreakfast, merely for the sake of the cause, they made themselves scarce, although they stuck stubbornlyto their suspicions. 

Such suspicions, anyhow, were a necessary accompaniment to the profession of fasting. No one couldpossibly watch the hunger artist continuously, day and night, and so no one could produce first-hand

Franz Kafka

1

A Hunger Artist


evidence that the fast had really been rigorous and continuous; only the artist himself could know that, hewas therefore bound to be the sole completely satisfied spectator of his own fast. Yet for other reasons hewas never satisfied; it was not perhaps mere fasting that had brought him to such skeleton thinness thatmany people had regretfully to keep away from his exhibitions, because the sight of him was too much forthem, perhaps it was dissatisfaction with himself that had worn him down. For he alone knew, what noother initiate knew, how easy it was to fast. It was the easiest thing in the world. He made no secret of this,yet people did not believe him, at best they set him down as modest, most of them, however, thought hewas out for publicity or else was some kind of cheat who found it easy to fast because he had discovereda way of making it easy, and then had the impudence to admit the fact, more or less. He had to put upwith all that, and in the course of time had got used to it, but his inner dissatisfaction always rankled, andnever yet, after any term of fasting—this must be granted to his credit—had he left the cage of his ownfree will. The longest period of fasting was fixed by his impresario at forty days, beyond that term he wasnot allowed to go, not even in great cities, and there was good reason for it, too. Experience had proventhat for about forty days the interest of the public could be stimulated by a steadily increasing pressure ofadvertisement, but after that the town began to lose interest, sympathetic support began notably to fall off;there were of course local variations as between one town and another or one country and another, but asa general rule forty days marked the limit. So on the fortieth day the flower-bedecked cage was opened,enthusiastic spectators filled the hall, a military band played, two doctors entered the cage to measure theresults of the fast, which were announced through a megaphone, and finally two young ladies appeared,blissful at having been selected for the honor, to help the hunger artist down the few steps leading to asmall table on which was spread a carefully chosen invalid repast. And at this very moment the artistalways turned stubborn. True, he would entrust his bony arms to the outstretched helping hands of theladies bending over him, but stand up he would not. Why stop fasting at this particular moment, after fortydays of it? He had held out for a long time, an inimitably long time, why stop now, when he was in hisbest fasting form, or rather, not yet quite in is bet fasting form? Why should he be cheated of the famehe would get for fasting longer, for being not only the record hunger artist of all time, which presumablyhe was already, but for beating his own record by a performance beyond human imagination, since hefelt that there were no limits to his capacity for fasting? His public pretended to admire him so much,why should it have so little patience with him; if he could endure fasting longer, why shouldn’t the publicendure it? Besides, he was tired, he was comfortable sitting in the straw, and now he was supposed to lifthimself to his full height and go down to a meal the very thought of which gave him a nausea that only thepresence of the ladies kept him from betraying, and even that with an effort. And he looked up into theeyes of the ladies who were apparently so friendly and in reality so cruel, and shook his head, which felttoo heavy on its strengthless neck. But then there happened again what always happened. The impresariocame forward, without a word—for the band made speech impossible—lifted his arms in the air above theartist, as if inviting Heaven to look down upon this creature here in the straw, this suffering martyr, whichindeed he was, although in quite another sense; grasped him around the emaciated waist, with exaggeratedcaution, so that the frail condition he was in might be appreciated; and committed him to the care of theblenching ladies, not without secretly giving him a shaking so that his legs and body tottered and swayed. 
The artist now submitted completely; his head lolled on his breast as if it had landed there by chance; hisbody was hollowed out; his legs in a spasm of self-preservation clung close to each other at the knees, yetscraped on the ground as if it were not really solid ground, as if they were only trying to find solid ground;and the whole weight of his body, a featherweight after all, relapsed onto one of the ladies, who, lookingaround for help and panting a little—this post of honor was not at all what she had expected it to be—firststretched her neck as far as she could to keep her face at least free from contact with the artist, then findingthis impossible, and her more fortunate companion not coming to her aid but merely holding extended inher own trembling hand the little bunch of knucklebones that was the artist’s, to the great delight of the

Franz Kafka

2

A Hunger Artist


spectators burst into tears and had to be replaced by an attendant who had long been stationed in readiness. 
Then came the food, a little of which the impresario managed to get between the artist’s lips, while he satin a kind of half-fainting trance, to the accompaniment of cheerful patter designed to distract to public’sattention for the artist’s condition; after that, a toast was drunk to the public, supposedly prompted by awhisper from the artist in the impresario’s ear; the band confirmed it with a mighty flourish, the spectatorsmelted away, and no one had any cause to be dissatisfied with the proceedings, no one except the hungerartist himself, he only, as always. 

So he lived for many years, with small regular intervals of recuperation, in visible glory, honored by theworld, yet in spite of that, troubled in spirit, and all the more troubled because no-one would take histrouble seriously. What comfort could he possibly need? What more could he possibly wish for? And ifsome good-natured person, feeling sorry for him, tried to console him by pointing out that his melancholywas probably caused by fasting, it could happen, especially when he had been fasting for some time, thathe reacted with an outburst of fury and to the general alarm began to shake the bars of his cage like awild animal. Yet the impresario had a way of punishing these outbreaks which he rather enjoyed puttinginto operation. He would apologize publicly for the artist’s behaviour, which was only to be excused, headmitted, because of the irritability caused by fasting; a condition hardly to be understood by well-fedpeople; then by natural transition he went on to mention the artist’s equally incomprehensible boast thathe could fast for much longer than he was doing; he praised the high ambition, the good will, the greatself-denial undoubtedly implicit in such a statement; and then quite simply countered it by bringing outphotographs, which were also on sale to the public, showing the artist on the fortieth day of a fast lying inbed almost dead from exhaustion. This perversion of the truth, familiar to the artist though it was, alwaysunnerved him afresh and proved too much for him. What was a consequence of the premature ending ofhis fast was here presented as the cause of it! To fight against this lack of understanding, against a wholeworld of non-understanding, was impossible. Time and again in good faith he stood by the bars listeningto the impresario, but as soon as the photographs appeared he always let go and sank with a groan backonto his straw, and the reassured public could once more come close and gaze at him. 

A few years later when the witnesses of such scenes called them to mind, they often failed to understandthemselves at all. For meanwhile the aforementioned change in public interest had set in; it seemedto happen almost overnight; there may have been profound causes for it, but who was going to botherabout that; at any rate the pampered hunger artist suddenly found himself deserted on fine day by theamusement-seekers, who went streaming past him to other more-favored attractions. For the last time theimpresario hurried him over half Europe to discover whether the old interest might still survive here andthere; all in vain; everywhere, as if by secret agreement, a positive revulsion from professional fasting wasin evidence. Of course it could not really have sprung up so suddenly as all that, and many premonitorysymptoms which had not been sufficiently remarked or suppressed during the rush and glitter of successnow came retrospectively to mind, but it was now too late to take any countermeasures. Fasting wouldsurely come into fashion again at some future date, yet that was no comfort for those living in the present. 
What, then, was the hunger artist to do? He had been applauded by thousands in his time and could hardlycome down to showing himself in a street booth at village fairs, and as for adopting another profession, hewas not only too old for that but too fanatically devoted to fasting. So he took leave of the impresario, hispartner in an unparalleled career, and hired himself to a large circus; in order to spare his own feelings heavoided reading the conditions of his contract. 

A large circus with its enormous traffic in replacing and recruiting men, animals, and apparatus can alwaysfind a use for people at any time, even for a hunger artist, provided of course that he does not ask too much,and in this particular case anyhow it was not only the artist who was taken on but his famous and long-known name as well, indeed considering the peculiar nature of his performance, which was not impaired

Franz Kafka

3

A Hunger Artist


by advancing age, it could not be objected that here was an artist past his prime, no longer at the heightof his professional skill, seeking a refuge in some quiet corner of a circus; on the contrary, the hungerartist averred that he could fast as well as ever, which was entirely credible, he even alleged that if he wereallowed to fast as he liked, and this was at once promised him without more ado, he could astound theworld by establishing a record never yet achieved, a statement that certainly provoked a smile among theother professionals, since it left out of account the change in public opinion, which the hunger artist in hiszeal conveniently forgot. 

He had not, however, actually lost his sense of the real situation and took it as a matter of course that heand his cage should be stationed, not in the middle of the ring as a main attraction, but outside, near theanimal cages, on a site that was after all easily accessible. Large and gaily painted placards made a framefor the cage and announced what was to be seen inside it. When the public came thronging out in theintervals to see the animals, they could hardly avoid passing the hunger artist’s cage and stopping therefor a moment, perhaps they might even have stayed longer, had not those pressing behind them behindthem in the narrow gangway, who did not understand why they should be held up on their way towards theexcitements of the menagerie, made it impossible for anyone to stand gazing for any length of time. Andthat was the reason why the hunger artist, who had of course been looking forward to these visiting hoursas the main achievement of his life, began instead to shrink from them. At first he could hardly wait forthe intervals; it was exhilarating to watch the crowds come streaming his way, until only too soon—noteven the most obstinate self-deception, clung to almost consciously, could hold out against the fact—theconviction was borne in upon him that these people, most of them, to judge from their actions, againand again, without exception, were all on their way to the menagerie. And the first sight of them froma distance remained the best. For when they reached his cage he was at once deafened by the storm ofshouting and abuse that arose from the two contending factions, which renewed themselves continuously,of those who wanted to stop and stare at him—he soon began to dislike them more than the others—notout of real interest but only out of obstinate self-assertiveness, and those who wanted to go straight onto the animals. When the first great rush was past, the stragglers came along, and these, whom nothingcould have prevented from stopping to look at him as long as they had breath, raced past with long strides,hardly even glancing at him, in their haste to get to the menagerie in time. And all too rarely did it happenthat he had a stroke of luck, when some father of a family fetched up before him with his children, pointeda finger at the hunger artist, and explained at length what the phenomenon meant, telling stories of earlieryears when he himself had watched similar but much more thrilling performances, and the children, stillrather uncomprehending, since neither inside or outside school had they been sufficiently prepared for thislesson—what did they care about fasting?—yet showed by the brightness of their intent eyes that newand better times might be coming. Perhaps, said the hunger artist to himself, many a time, things wouldbe a little better if his cage were set not quite so near the menagerie. That made it too easy for peopleto make their choice, to say nothing of what he suffered from the stench of the menagerie, the animals’restlessness by night, the carrying past of raw lumps of flesh for the beasts of prey, the roaring at feedingtimes, depressed him continually. But he did not dare to lodge a complaint with the management; after all,he had the animals to thank for the troops of people who passed his cage, among whom there might alwaysbe one here and there to take an interest in him, and who could tell where they might seclude him if hecalled attention to his existence and thereby to the fact that, strictly speaking, he was only an impedimenton the way to the menagerie. 

A small impediment, to be sure, one that grew steadily less. People grew familiar with the strange idea thatthey could be expected, in times like these, to take an interest in a hunger artist, and with this familiaritythe verdict went out against him. He might fast as much as he could, and he did so; but nothing couldsave him now, people passed him by. Just try to explain to anyone the art of fasting! Anyone who has

Franz Kafka

4

A Hunger Artist


no feeling for it cannot be made to understand it. The fine placards grew dirty and illegible, they weretom down; the little notice board showing the number of fast days achieved, which at first was changedcarefully every day, had long stayed at the same figure, for after the first few weeks even this small taskseemed pointless to the staff; and so the artist simply fasted on and on, as he had once dreamed of doing,and it was no trouble to him, just as he had always foretold, but no one counted the days, no one, not eventhe artist himself, knew what records he was already breaking, and his heart became heavy. And whenonce in a while some leisurely passer-by stopped, made merry over the old figure on the board and spokeof swindling, that was in its way the stupidest lie ever invented by indifference and inborn malice, since itwas not the hunger artist who was cheating, he was working honestly, but the world was cheating him ofhis reward. 

Many more days went by, however, and that too came to an end. An overseer’s eye fell on the cage oneday and he asked the attendants why this perfectly good cage should be left standing there unused withdirty straw inside it; nobody knew, until one man, helped out by the notice board, remembered about thehunger artist. They poked into the straw with sticks and found him in it. “Are you still fasting?” asked theoverseer, “when on earth do you mean to stop?” “Forgive me, everybody,” whispered the hunger artist;only the overseer, who had his ear to the bars, understood him. “Of course,” said the overseer, and tappedhis forehead with a finger to let the attendants know what state the man was in, “we forgive you.” “I alwayswanted you to admire my fasting,” said the hunger artist. “We do admire it,” said the overseer, affably. 
“But you shouldn’t admire it,” said the hunger artist. “Well then we don’t admire it,” said the overseer,“but why shouldn’t we admire it?” “Because I have to fast, I can’t help it,” said the hunger artist. “What afellow you are,” said the overseer, “and why can’t you help it?” “Because,” said the hunger artist, liftinghis head a little and speaking, with his lips pursed, as if for a kiss, right into the overseer’s ear, so that nosyllable might be lost, “because I couldn’t find the food I liked. If I had found it, believe me, I should havemade no fuss and stuffed myself like you or anyone else.” These were his last words, but in his dimmingeyes remained the firm though no longer proud persuasion that he was still continuing to fast. 

“Well, clear this out now!” said the overseer, and they buried the hunger artist, straw and all. Into thecage they put a young panther. Even the most insensitive felt it refreshing to see this wild creature leapingaround the cage that had so long been dreary. The panther was all right. The food he liked was broughtto him without hesitation by the attendants; he seemed not even to miss his freedom; his noble body,furnished almost to the bursting point with all that it needed, seemed to carry freedom around with it too;somewhere in his jaws it seemed to lurk; and the joy of life streamed with such ardent passion from histhroat that for the onlookers it was not easy to stand the shock of it. But they braced themselves, crowdedaround the cage, and did not ever want to move away. 